SEDUCTION

CultureTexts
Arthur and Marilouise Kroker

General Editors

CultureTexts is a series of creative explorations in theory, politics and
culture at the fin-de-millenium . Thematically focussed around key
theoretical debates in the postmodern condition, the CultureTexts series
challenges received discourses in art, social and political theory,
feminism, psychoanalysis, value inquiry, science and technology, the
body, and critical aesthetics . Taken individually, contributions to
CultureTexts represent the forward breaking-edge of postmodern theory
and practice.

Titles
Seduction

Jean Baudrillard
Panic Encyclopedia

Arthur Kroker, Marilouise Kroker and David Cook
Life After Postmodernism : Essays on Value and Culture

edited and introduced by John Fekete
Body Invaders

edited and introduced by Arthur and Marilouise Kroker
The Postmodern Scene : Excremental Culture and HyperAesthetics

Arthur Kroker/David Cook

SEDUCTION

JEAN BAUDRILLARD
translated by Brian Singer

New World Perspectives
CultureTexts Series
Montreal

COPYRIGHT NOTICE: Published by CTHEORY BOOKS in
partnership with NWP and copyright, © 2001, by CTHEORY
BOOKS. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
reproduced in any form by any electronic or mechanical means
(including photocopying, recording, or information storage and
retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher,
except for reading and browsing via the World Wide Web.
Users are not permitted to mount this file on any network
servers. Readers are encouraged to download this material for
personal use. Commercial use with permission only.

First published as De la seduction by Editions Galilee, 1979.
9, rue Linne, Paris 5e.
© Editions Galilee
English language copyright New World Perspectives, 1990 .

ISBN 0-920393-25-X
Canadian Cataloguing in Publication Data
Baudrillard, Jean
Seduction
(CultureTexts series)
Translation of: De la seduction.
ISBN 0-920393-25-X
1. Seduction-Psychological aspects.
(Psychology). 3 . Sex (Psychology) 4.
1 . Title. II . Series .
BF637.S36133813 1990
2 . Femininity
Postmodernism.z

V

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
I . THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX
The Ecliptic of Sex
The Eternal Irony of the Community
Stereo-Porno
Seduction / Production

3
12
28
37

II . SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES
The Sacred Horizon of Appearances
Trompe l'oeil or Enchanted Simulation
I'll Be Your Mirror
Death in Samarkand
The Secret and The Challenge
The Effigy of the Seductress
The Ironic Strategy of the Seducer
The Fear of Being Seduced

53
60
67
72
79
85
98
119

III . THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION
The Passion for Rules
The Dual, the Polar and the Digital
The "Ludic" and Cold Seduction
Seduction as Destiny

131
154
157
179

INTRODUCTION
A fixed destiny weighs on seduction. For religion seduction
was a strategy of the devil, whether in the guise of witchcraft
or love . It is always the seduction of evil - or of the world. It
is the very artifice of the world . Its malediction has been unchanged in ethics and philosophy, and today it is maintained
in psychoanalysis and the `liberation of desire .' Given the
present-day promotion of sex, evil and perversion, along with
the celebration of the ofttimes programmatic resurrection of
all that was once accursed, it might seem paradoxical that seduction has remained in the shadows - and even returned thereto
permanently.
The eighteenth century still spoke of seduction. It was, with
valour and honour, a central preoccupation of the aristocratic
spheres. The bourgeois Revolution put an end to this preoccupation (and the others, the later revolutions ended it irrevocably - every revolution, in its beginnings, seeks to end the
seduction of appearances) . The bourgeois era dedicated itself
to nature and production, things quite foreign and even expressly fatal to seduction. And since sexuality arises, as Foucault notes,
from a process of production (of discourse, speech or desire),
it is not at all surprising that seduction has been all the more
covered over. We live today the promotion of nature, be it the
good nature of the soul of yesteryear, or the good material nature of things, or even the psychic nature of desire. Nature pursues its realization through all the metamorphosis of the
repressed, and through the liberation of all energies, be they

2

SEDUCTION

psychic, social or material .
Seduction, however, never belongs to the order of nature,
but that of artifice - never to the order of energy, but that of
signs and rituals. This is why all the great systems of production and interpretation have not ceased to exclude seduction
- to its good fortune - from their conceptual field. For seduction continues to haunt them from without, and from deep within its forsaken state, threatening them with collapse. i t awaits
the destruction of every godly order, including those of production and desire. Seduction continues to appear to all orthodoxies
as malefice and artifice, a black magic for the deviation of all
truths, an exaltation of the malicious use of signs, a conspiracy
of signs. Every discourse is threatened with this sudden reversibility, absorbed into its own signs without a trace of meaning. This is why all disciplines, which have as an axiom the
coherence and finality of their discourse, must try to exorcize
it. This is where seduction and femininity are confounded, indeed, confused . Masculinity has always been haunted by this
sudden reversibility within the feminine . Seduction and femininity are ineluctable as the reverse side of sex, :meaning and
power.
Today the exorcism is more violent and systematic. We are
entering the era of final solutions; for example, that of the sexual revolution, of the production and management of all liminal and subliminal pleasures, the micro-processing of desire,
with the woman who produces herself as woman, and as sex,
being the last avatar. Ending seduction.
Or else the triumph of a soft seduction, a white, diffuse feminization and eroticization of all relations in an enervated social
universe.
Or else none of the above. For nothing can be greater than
seduction itself, not even the order that destroys it.

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX

Nothing is less certain today than sex, behind the liberation
of its discourse. And nothing today is less certain than desire,
behind the proliferation of its images .
In matters of sex, the proliferation is approaching total loss.
Here lies the secret of the ever increasing production of sex
and its signs, and the hyperrealism of sexual pleasure, particularly feminine pleasure. The principle of uncertainty has extended to sexual reason, as well as political and economic reason .
The state of sex's liberation is also that of its indetermination . No more want, no more prohibitions, and no more limits :
it is the loss of every referential principle . Economic reason is
sustained only by penury; it is put into question with the realization of its objective, the abolition of the spectre of penury.
Desire too is sustained only by want . When desire is entirely
on the side of demand, when it is operationalized without restrictions, it loses its imaginary and, therefore, its reality; it appears everywhere, but in generalized simulation . It is the ghost
of desire that haunts the defunct reality of sex. Sex is everywhere, except in sexuality (Barthes).
In sexual mythology, the transition towards the feminine is
contemporaneous with the passage from determination to
general indetermination. The feminine is not substituted for the

6 SEDUCTION

masculine as one sex for another, according to some structural
inversion. It is substituted as the end of the determinate
representation of sex, as the flotation of the law~that regulates
the difference between the'sexes. The ascent of the feminine
corresponds to both the apogee of sexual pleasure and a catastrophe relative to sex's reality principle .
And so it is femininity that is gripping, in the present and
fatal situation of sex's hyperrealixy - as it was yesterday, but in
direct contrast, in irony and seduction.
Freud was right: there is but one sexuality, one libido - and
it is masculine. Sexuality has a strong, discriminative structure
centered on the phallus, castration, the Name-of-the Father, and
repression . There is none other. There is no use dreaming of
some non-phallic, unlocked, unmarked sexuality. There is no
use seeking, from within this structure, to have the feminine
pass through to the other side, or to cross terms. Either the structure remains the same, with the female being'entirely absorbed
by the male, or else it collapses, and there is no longer either
female or male - the degree zero of the structure. This is very
much what is happening today: erotic polyvalence, the infinite
potentiality of desire, different connections, diffractions, libidinal intensities - all multiple variants of a liberatory alternative
coming from the frontiers of a psychoanalysis free of Freud,
or from the frontiers of desire free of psychoanalysis . Behind
the effervescence of the paradigm of sex, everything is converging towards the non-differentiation of the structure and its
potential neutralization .
The danger of the sexual revolution for the female is that she
will be enclosed within a structure that condemns her to either
discrimination when the structure is strong, or a derisory triumph within a weakened structure.
The feminine, however, is, and has always been, somewhere
else . That is the secret of its strength. Just as it is said that something lasts because its existence is not adequate to its essence,
it must be said that the feminine seduces because it is never
where it thinks it is, or where it thinks itself. The feminine is
not found in the history of suffering and oppression imputed

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 7

to it - women's historical tribulations (though by guile it conceals itself therein) . It suffers such servitude only when assigned
to and repressed within this structure - to which the sexual
revolution assigns and represses it all the more dramatically. But
by what aberrant complicity (complicit with what? if not, precisely, the male) would one have us believe that this is the female's history? Repression is already here in full force, in the
narrative of women's sexual and political misery, to the exclusion of every other type of strength and sovereignty.
There is an alternative to sex and to power, one that psychoanalysis cannot know because its axiomatics are sexual.And
yes, this alternative is undoubtedly of the order of the feminine, understood outside the opposition masculine/feminine,
that opposition being essentially masculine, sexual in intention,
and incapable of being overturned without ceasing to exist.
This strength of the feminine is that of seduction.
One may catch a glimpse of another, parallel universe (the
two never meet) with the decline of psychoanalysis and sexuality as strong structures, and their cleansing within a psy and
molecular universe (that of their final liberation). A universe
that can no longer be interpreted in terms of psychic or psychological relations, nor those of repression and the unconscious, but must be interpreted in the terms of play, challenges,
duels, the strategy of appearances - that is, the terms of seduction . A universe that can no longer be interpreted in terms of
structures and diacritical oppositions, but implies a seductive
reversibility - a universe where the feminine is not what opposes the masculine, but what seduces the masculine.
In seduction the feminine is neither a marked nor an unmarked term . It does not mask the "autonomy" of desire, pleasure or the body, or of a speech or writing that it has supposedly
lost(?). Nor does it lay claim to some truth of its own. It seduces.
To be sure, one calls the sovereignty of seduction feminine
by convention, the same convention that claims sexuality to
be fundamentally masculine. But the important point is that this
form of sovereignty has always existed - delineating, from a
distance, the feminine as something that is nothing, that is never

8

SEDUCTION

"produced," is never where it is produced (and certainly cannot, therefore, be found in any "feminist" demand). And this
not from the perspective of a psychic or biological bi-sexuality,
but that of the trans-sexuality of seduction which the entire
organization of sex tends to reject - as does psychoanalysis in
accordance with the axiom that there is no other structure than
that of sexuality (which renders it incapable, by definition, of
speaking about anything else).

What does the women's movement oppose to the phallocratic
structure? Autonomy, difference, a specificity of desire and pleasure, a different relation to the female body, a speech, a writing
- but never seduction . They are ashamed of seduction, as implying an artificial presentation of the body, or a life of vassalage
and prostitution . They do not understand that seduction

represents mastery over the symbolic universe, while power
represents only mastery of the real universe. The sovereignty

of seduction is incommensurable with the possession of political or sexual power.
There is a strange, fierce complicity between'the feminist
movement and the order of truth . For seduction is resisted and
rejected as a misappropriation of women's true being, a truth
that in the last instance is to be found inscribed in their bodies
and desires. In one stroke the immense privilege of the feminine is effaced: the privilege of having never acceded to truth
or meaning, and of having remained absolute master of the realm
of appearances. The capacity immanent to seduction to deny
things their truth and turn it into a game, the pure play of appearances, and thereby foil all systems of power and meaning
with a mere turn of the hand . The ability to turn appearances
in on themselves, to play on the body's appearances, rather than
with the depths of desire. Now all appearances are reversible . . .
only at the level of appearances are systems fragile and vulnerable . . . meaning is vulnerable only to enchantment . One must
be incredibly blind to deny the sole force that is equal and superior to all others, since with a simple play of the strategy of
appearances, it turns them upside down .

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 9

Anatomy is destiny, Freud said . One might be surprised that
the feminist movement's rejection of this definition, phallic by
definition, and sealed with the stamp of anatomy, opens onto
an alternative that remains fundamentally biological and anatomical:
Indeed, woman's pleasure does not have to choose
between clitoral activity and vaginal passivity, for
example. The pleasure of the vaginal caress does
not have to be substituted for that of the clitoral
caress . They each contribute, irreplaceably, to
woman's pleasure . Among other caresses . . . Fondling the breasts, touching the vulva, spreading the
lips, stroking the posterior wall of the vagina,
brushing against the mouth of the uterus, and so
on . To evoke only a few of the most specifically
female pleasures.
Luce Irigaray
Parole defemme? But it is always an anatomical speech, always that of the body. What is specific to women lies in the
diffraction of the erogenous zones, in a decentered eroticism,
the diffuse polyvalence of sexual pleasure and the transfiguration of the entire body by desire : this is the theme song that
runs through the entire female, sexual revolution, but also
through our entire culture of the body, from the Anagrammes
of Bellmer to Deleuze's mechanized connections. It is always
a question of the body, if not the anatomical, then the organic,
erogenous body, the functional body that, even in fragmented
and metaphorical form, would have pleasure as its object and
desire as its natural manifestation. But then either the body is
here only a metaphor (and if this is the case, what is the sexual
revolution, and our entirt culture, having become a body culture, talking about?), or else, with this body speech, this woman speech, we have, very definitely, entered into an anatomical
destiny, into anatomy as destiny. There is nothing here radically opposed to Freud's maxim.
Nowhere is it a question of seduction, the body worked by
artifice (and not by desire), the body seduced, the body to be

10

SEDUCTION

seduced, the body in its passion separated from its truth, from
that ethical truth of desire which obsesses us - that serious,
profoundly religious truth that the body today incarnates, and
for which seduction is just as evil and deceitful as it once was
for religion . Nowhere is it a question of the body delivered to
appearances . Now, seduction alone is radically opposed to anatomy as destiny. Seduction alone breaks the distinctive sexualization of bodies and the inevitable. phallic economy that results.
Any movement that believes it can subvert a system by its
infra-structure is naive. Seduction is more intelligent, and seemingly spontaneously so. Immediately obvious - seduction need
not be demonstrated, nor justified - it is there all at once, in
the reversal of all the alleged depth of the real, of all psychology, anatomy, truth, or power. It knows (this is its secret) that
there is no anatomy, nor psychology, that all signs are reversible. Nothing belongs to it, except appearances - all powers elude
it, but it "reversibilizes" all their signs . How can' one oppose
seduction? The only thing truly at stake is mastery of the strategy
of'appearances, against the force of being and reality. There is
no need to play being against being, or truth against truth ; why
become stuck undermining foundations, when a light manipulation of appearances will do.
Now woman is but appearance . And it is the feminine as appearance that thwarts masculine depth . Instead of rising up
against such "insulting" counsel, women would do well to let
themselves be seduced by its truth, for here lies the secret of
their strength, which they are in the process of losing by erecting
a contrary, feminine depth.
.
It is not quite the feminine as surface that is opposed to the
masculine as depth, but the feminine as indistinctness of surface and depth. Or as indifference to the authentic and the artificial . Joan Riviere, in "Feminite sans mascarade" (La
Psychoanalyse no. 7), makes a fundamental claim - one that
contains within it all seduction: "Whether femininity be authentic or superficial, it is fundamentally the same thing."
This can be said only of the feminine . The masculine, by contrast, possesses unfailing powers of discrimination and abso-

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX

11

lute criteria for pronouncing the truth. The masculine is certain, the feminine is insoluble.
Now, surprisingly, this proposition, that in the feminine the
very distinction between authenticity and artifice is without
foundation, also defines the space of simulation. Here too one
cannot distinguish between reality and its models, there being
no other reality than that secreted by the simulative models,
just as there is no other femininity than that of appearances.
Simulation too is insoluble.
This strange coincidence points to the ambiguity of the feminine : it simultaneously provides radical evidence of simulation,
and the only possibility of its overcoming - in seduction, precisely.

THE ETERNAL IRONY OF
THE COMMUNITY
This femininity, the eternal irony
of the community.

Hegel

Femininity as a principle of uncertainty.
It causes the sexual poles to waver. It is not the pole opposed
to masculinity, but what abolishes the differential opposition,
and thus sexuality itself, as incarnated historically in the masculine phallocracy, as it might be incarnated in the future in
a female phallocracy.
If femininity is a principle of uncertainty, it is where it is itself uncertain that this uncertainty will be greatest : in the play
of femininity.
Transvestism . Neither homosexuals nor transexuals, transvestites like to play with the indistinctness of the sexes. The spell
they cast, over themselves as well as others, is born of sexual
vacillation and not, as is customary, the attraction of one sex
for the other. They do not really like male men or female women, nor those who define themselves, redundantly, as distinct
sexual beings . In order for sex to exist, signs must reduplicate
biological being. Here the signs are separated from biology, and
consequently the sexes no longer exist properly speaking . What

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX

13

transvestites love is this game of signs, what excites them is to

seduce the signs themselves . With them everything is makeup,

theater, and seduction. They appear obsessed with games of
sex, but they are obsessed, first of all, with play itself; and if
their lives appear more sexually endowed than our own, it is
because they make sex into a total, gestural, sensual, and ritual
game, an exalted but ironic invocation .
Nico seemed so beautiful only because her femininity appeared so completely put on . She emanated something more
than beauty, something more sublime, a different seduction.
And there was deception: she was a false drag queen, a real
woman, in fact, playing the queen. It is easier for a nonfemale/female than for a real woman, already legitimated by
her sex, to move amongst the signs and take seduction to the
limit. Only the non-female/female can exercise an untainted
fascination, because s/he is more seductive than sexual . The
fascination is lost when the real sex shows through; to be sure,
some other desire may find something here, but precisely no
longer in that perfection that belongs to artifice alone.
Seduction is always more singular and sublime than sex, and
it commands the higher price.
One must not seek to ground transvestism in bisexuality. For
the sexes and sexual dispositions, whether mixed or ambivalent, indefinite or inverted, are still real, and still bear witness
to the psychic reality of sex. Here, however, it is this very definition of the sexual that is eclipsed . Not that this game is perverse. What is perverse is what perverts the order of the terms;
but here there are no longer any terms to pervert, only signs
to seduce.
Nor should one seek to ground transvestism in the unconscious or in "latent homosexuality." The old casuistry of latency is itself a product of the sexual imaginary of surfaces and
depths, and always implies a diagnosis of symptoms and prognosis for their correction . But here nothing is latent, everything
calls into question the very idea of a secret, determinate instance
of sex, the idea that the deep play of phantasies controls the
superficial play of signs . On the contrary, everything is played
out in the vertigo of this inversion, this transsubstantiation of

sex into signs that is the secret of all seduction.

14

SEDUCTION

Perhaps the transvestite's ability to seduce comes straight from
parody - a parody of sex by its over-signification . The prostitution of transvestites would then have a different meaning from
the more common prostitution of women. It would be closer
to the sacred prostitution practiced by the Ancients (or the
sacred status of the hermaphrodite) . It would be contiguous
with the theater, or with makeup, the ritual and burlesque ostentation of a sex whose own pleasure is absent .
The seduction itself is coupled with a parody in which an
implacable hostility to the feminine shows through, and which
might be interpreted as a male appropriation of the panoply
of female allurements. The transvestite would then reproduce
the situation of the first warrior -- he alone was seductive - the
woman being nul (consider fascism, and its affinity for transvestites). But rather than the addition of the sexes is not this
their invalidation? And doesn't the masculine, in this mockery
of femininity, rescind its status and prerogratives in order to
become a contrapuntal element in a ritual game?
In any case, this parody of femininity is not quite as acerbic
as one might think, since it is the parody of femininity as men
imagine and stage it, as well as phantasize it. A femininity exaggerated, degraded, parodied (drag queens in Barcelona keep
their moustaches and expose their hairy chests), the claim is
that in this society femininity is naught but the signs with which
men rig it up. To over-simulate femininity is to suggest that woman is but a masculine model of simulation . Here is a challenge
to the female model by way of a female game, a, challenge to
the female/woman by way of the female/sign. And it is possible that this living, feigned denunciation, which' plays on the
furthermost bounds of artifice, and simultaneously plays with
the mechanisms of femininity to the point of perfection, is more
lucid and radical than all the idea-political claims of a femininity "alienated in its being." Here femininity is said to have no
being (no nature, writing, singular pleasures or, as Freud said,
particularized libido) . Contrary to every search for an authentic femininity, for a woman's speech, etc., the claim here is that
the female is nothing, and that this is her strength .
Here is a more subtle response than feminism's outright denial
of the law of castration . For the latter encounters symbolic, not

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX

15

anatomical fate, one that weighs on all possible sexuality. The
overturning of this law, therefore, can only result from its parodic resolution, from the ex-centricity of the signs of femininity,
the reduplication of signs that puts an end to every insoluble
biology, or metaphysics of the sexes. Makeup is nothing else:
a triumphant parody, a solution by excess, the surface hypersimulation of this in-depth simulation that is itself the symbolic law of castration - a transsexual game of seduction.
The irony of artificial practices : the peculiar ability of the
painted woman or prostitute to exaggerate her features, to turn
them into more than a sign, and by this usage of, not the false
as opposed to the true, but the more false than false, to incarnate the peaks of sexuality while simultaneously being absorbed
in their simulation . The irony proper to the constitution of woman as idol or sex object : in her closed perfection, she puts an
end to sex play and refers man, the lord and master of sexual
reality, to his transparency as an imaginary subject. The ironic power of the object, then, which she loses when promoted
to the status of a subject.
All masculine power is a power to produce. All that is
produced, be it the production of woman as female, falls within the register of masculine power. The only, and irresistible,
power of femininity is the inverse power of seduction. In itself
it is nul, seduction has no power of its own, only that of annuling the power of production . But it always annuls the latter.
Has there, moreover, ever been a phallic power? This entire
history of patriarchal domination, of phallocracy, the immemorial male privilege, is perhaps only a story. Beginning with the
exchange of women in primitive societies, stupidly interpreted as the first stage of woman-as-object. All that we have been
asked to believe - the universal discourse on the inequality of
the sexes, the theme song of an egalitarian and revolutionary
modernity (reinforced, these days, with all the energies of a
failed revolution) - is perhaps one gigantic misunderstanding .
The opposite hypothesis is just as plausible and, from a certain
perspective, more interesting - that is, that the feminine has
never been dominated, but has always been dominant . The feminine considered not as a sex, but as the form transversal to every sex, as well as to every power, as the secret, virulent form

16 SEDUCTION

of in-sexuality. The feminine as a challenge whose devastation
can be experienced today throughout the entire expanse of sexuality And hasn't this challenge, which is also that of seduction, always been triumphant?
In this sense, the masculine has always been but a residual,
secondary and fragile formation, one that must be defended
by retrenchments, institutions, and artifices. The phallic fortress offers all the signs of a fortress, that is to say, of weakness.
It can defend itself only from the ramparts of a manifest sexuality, of a finality of sex that exhausts itself in reproduction, or
in the orgasm .
One can hypothesize that the feminine is the only sex, and
that the masculine only exists by a superhuman effort to leave
it. A moment's distraction, and one falls back into the feminine .
The feminine would have a decisive advantage, the masculine
a definite handicap . One sees how ridiculous it is to want to
"liberate" the one in order that it accede to the fragility of the
other's "power," to the eccentric, paradoxical, paranoid and tiresome masculine state.
The phallic fable reversed: where woman is created from man
by subtraction, here it is man created from woman by exception . A fable easily strengthened by Bettleheim's analysis in Symbolic Wounds, where men are said to have erected their powers
and institutions in order to thwart the originally far superior
powers of women. The driving force is not penis, envy, but on
the contrary, man's jealousy of woman's power of fertilization.
This female advantage could not be atoned ; a different order
had to be built at all costs, a masculine social, political and economic order, wherein this advantage could be reduced. Thus
the ritual practices whereby the signs of the opposite sex are
appropriated are largely masculine: scarifications ; mutilations,
artificial vaginizations, couvades, etc.
All this is as convincing as a paradoxical hypothesis can be
(and it is always more interesting; than the received wisdom),
but in the end it only reverses the terms, and so turns the feminine into an original substance, a sort of anthropological infrastructure . It reverses the anatomical determination, but lets
it subsist as destiny - and once again the "irony of femininity"
is lost.

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX

17

The irony is lost when the feminine is instituted as a sex, even
and above all when it is in order to denounce its oppression .
It is the eternal illusion of enlightenment humanism, which
aspires to liberate the servile sex, race or class in the very terms
of its servitude. That the feminine becomes a sex in its own
right! An absurdity, if posed in neither the terms of sex nor power.
The feminine knows neither equivalence nor value: it is, therefore, not soluble in power. It is not even subversive, it is reversible. Power, on the other hand, is soluble in the reversibility
of the feminine. If the "facts" cannot decide whether it was
the masculine or feminine that was dominant throughout the
ages (once again, the thesis of women's oppression is based on
a caricatural phallocratic myth), by contrast, it remains clear
that in matters of sexuality, the reversible form prevails over
the linear form. The excluded form prevails, secretly, over the
dominant form. The seductive form prevails over the productive form .
Femininity in this sense is on the same side as madness. It
is because madness secretly prevails that it must be normalized
(thanks to, amongst other things, the hypothesis of the unconscious) . It is because femininity secretly prevails that it must be
recycled and normalized (in sexual liberation in particular).

And in the orgasm.
The despoilment of the orgasm, the absence of sexual pleasure, is often advanced as characteristic of women's oppression .
A flagrant injustice whose immediate rectification everyone must
pursue in accord with the injunctions of a sort of long-distance
race or sex rally. Sexual pleasure has become a requisite and
a fundamental right. The most recent of the rights of man, it
has acceded to the dignity of a categorical imperative. It is immoral to act otherwise. But this imperative does not even have
the Kantian charm of endless finalities . As the management and
self-management of desire, its imposition does not, no more
than that of the law, allow ignorance as a defense.
But this is to remain unaware that sexual pleasure too is rever-

18

SEDUCTION

sible, that is to say that, in the absence or denial of the orgasm,
superior intensity is possible. It is here, where the end of sex
becomes aleatory again, that something arises that can be called
seduction or delight. Or again, sexual pleasure can be just a pretext
for another, more exciting, more passionate game . This is what
occurred in The Empire of the Senses, where the aim was to push
sexual pleasure to its limit and beyond - a challenge that prevails
over the workings of desire, because it is much more dizzying,
because it involves the passions while the other implies only a drive.
But this vertigo can be equally present in the rejection of sexual pleasure . Who knows if women, far from being "despoiled,"
have not, from time immemorial, been playing a game of their
own by triumphantly asserting a right to sexual reticence? If

they have not, from the depths of their sexual impassibility, been
throwing down a challenge, challenging men's pleasure to be
but the pleasure of men alone? No one knows to what destructive depths such provocation can go, nor what omnipotence
it implies . Men, reduced to solitary pleasures, and enmeshed
within the directives of delight and conquest, never did find

a way out .
Who won this game with its different strategies? Men, apparently, all down the line. But it is by no means certain that they
did not lose themselves in this terrain and become bogged down
(as in that of the seizure of power) consequent to a sort of forward
flight that could neither assure them of safety, nor relieve them
of their secret despair at what had escaped them - whatever
their gains or calculations . This had to end: it was imperative
that women have orgasms. Measures had to be taken to liberate them and make them climax -- thereby ending this unbearable challenge that ultimately nullifies sexual pleasure in a
possible strategy of non-pleasure. For sexual pleasure knows
no strategy : it is only energy seeking an outlet . It is therefore quite
inferior to any strategy that uses it as its material, and uses desire
itself as a tactical element. This is the central theme of the libertine sexuality of the eighteenth century, from Laclos to Casanova
and Sade (including Kierkegaard in Diary of the Seducer), for
whom sexuality still retains its ceremonial, ritual and strategic
character, before sinking, with the Rights of Man; and psychology, into the revealed truth of sex .

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX

19

Here then is the era of the pill when sexual pleasure is
decreed. The end of the right to sexual reticence. Women must
realize that they are being dispossessed of something essential
for them to put up so much resistance (all those ghosts of
"missed" acts) to the "rational" adoption of the pill . The same
resistance as that of entire generations to school, medicine, security and work. The same profound intuition about the ravages
of an unfettered liberty, speech or pleasure. Defiance, the other's
defiance, is no longer possible : all symbolic logic has been eliminated to the advantage of a permanent erection and its blackmail (without counting the tendencious lowering of the rate
of sexual pleasure itself) .
The "traditional" woman's sexuality was neither repressed
nor forbidden. Within her role she was entirely herself; she was
in no way defeated, nor passive, nor did she dream of her future "liberation ." It is the beautiful souls who, retrospectively,
see women as alienated from time immemorial, and then liberated. And there is a profound disdain in this vision, the same
disdain as that shown towards the "alienated" masses supposedly
incapable of being anything but mystified sheep.
It is easy to paint a picture of woman alienated through the
ages, and then open the doors of desire for her under the
auspices of the revolution and psychoanalysis . It is all so simple, so obscene in its simplicity - worse, it implies the very essence of sexism and racism : commiseration.
Fortunately, the female has never fit this image. She has always had her own strategy, the unremitting, winning strategy
of challenge (one of whose major forms is seduction) . There
is no need to lament the wrongs she suffered, nor to want to
rectify them . No need to play the lover of justice for the weaker sex. No need to mortgage everything for some liberation or
desire whose secret had to wait till the twentieth century to
be revealed . At each moment of the story the game was played
with a full deck, with all the cards, including the trumps . And
men did not win, not at all . On the contrary, it is women who
are now about to lose, precisely under the sign of sexual pleas-

20 SEDUCTION

ure - but this is another story.

It is the story of the feminine in the present tense, in a culture that produces everything, snakes everything speak, everything babble, everything climax . The promotion'of the female
as a sex in its own right (equal rights, equal pleasures), of the
female as value - at the expense of the female as a principle
of uncertainty. All sexual liberation lies in this strategy : the imposition of the rights, status and pleasure of women . The overexposing and staging of the female as sex, and of the orgasm
as the repeated proof of sex.
Pornography states this clearly A trilogy of spread, sensualism and signification, pornography promotes female sexual
pleasure in so exaggerated a manner, only in order to better
bury the uncertainty that hovers over the "black continent."
No more of that "eternal irony of the community" of which
Hegel spoke. Henceforth women will climax, and will know
why. All femininity will be made visible - woman as emblematic
of orgasm, and orgasm as emblematic of sexuality. No more uncertainty, no more secrets. This is the radical obscenity that is
beginning.

Pasolini's Salo, or a 120 Days -- a veritable twilight of seduction . All reversibility has been abolished in accordance with
an implacable logic. Everything is irreversibly masculine and
dead. Even the complicity, the promiscuity between executioners and victims has disappeared: inanimate torture, perpetrated without emotion, a cold machination. (Here one perceives
that sexual gratification is truly the industrial usufruct of the
body, and the opposite of all seduction : it is a product of extraction, a technological product of a machinery of bodies, a
logistics of pleasure which goes straight to its objective, only
to find its object dead) .
The film illustrates the truth that in a dominant masculine
system, and in every dominant system (which thereby becomes

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 2 1

masculine), it is femininity that incarnates reversibility, the possibility of play and symbolic involvement. Salo is a universe
completely sanitized of that minimum of seduction that provides the stakes not just of sex, but of every relation, including
death and the exchange of death (this is expressed in Salo, as
in Sade, by the predominance of sodomy). It is here that it becomes apparent that the feminine is not a sex (opposed to the
other), but what counters the sex that alone has full rights and
the full exercise of these rights, the sex that holds a monopoly
on sex: the masculine, itself haunted by the fear of something
other, of which sex is but the disenchanted form : seduction.
The latter is a game, sex is a function . Seduction supposes a
ritual order, sex and desire a natural order. It is these two fundamental forms that confront each other in the male and female, and not some biological difference or some naive rivalry
of power.

The feminine is not just seduction; it also suggests a challenge
to the male to be the sex, to monopolize sex and sexual pleasure, a challenge to go to the limits of its hegemony and exercise it unto death. Today phallocracy is collapsing under the
pressure of this challenge (present throughout our culture's sexual history), and its inability to meet it . Our entire conception
of sexuality may be collapsing because constructed around the
phallic function and the positive definition of sex . Everypositive form can accommodate itself to its negative form, but understands the challenge of the reversible form as mortal . Every
structure can adapt to its subversion or inversion, but not to
the reversion of its terms . Seduction is this reversible form .
Not the seduction to which women have been historically
consigned: the culture of the gynaeceum, of rouge and lace,
a seduction reworked by the mirror stage and the female imaginary, the terrain of sex games and ruses (though here lies
the only bodily ritual of western culture left, all the others having
disappeared, including politeness). But seduction as an ironic,
alternative form, one that breaks the referentiality of sex and
provides a space, not of desire, but of play and defiance.

22

SEDUCTION

This is what occurs in the most banal games of seduction :
I shy away ; it is not you who will give me pleasure, it is I who
will make you play, and thereby rob you of your pleasure . A
game in continuous movement -- one cannot assume that sexualstrategies alone are involved . There is, above;all, a strategy
of displacement (se-ducere : to take aside, to divert from one's
path) that implies a distortion of sex's truth. To play is not to
take pleasure . Seduction, as a passion and as a game at the level of the sign, acquires a certain sovereignty; it is seduction that
prevails in the long term because it implies a reversible, indeterminate order.
The glamour of seduction is quite superior to;the Christian
consolation of the pleasures of the flesh. One wants
us to con,
sider the latter a natural finality--- and many are driven mad for
failing to attain it . But love has nothing to do with sex drives,
if not in the libidinal look of our contemporary culture. Love
is a challenge and a prize: a challenge to the other to return
the love. And to be seduced is to challenge the other to be
seduced in turn (there is no finer argument than
, to accuse a
woman of being incapable of being seduced). Perversion, from
this perspective takes on a somewhat different meaning:, it is
to pretend to be seduced without being seduced, without beingcapable of being seduced.
The law ofseduction takes the form of an uninterrupted ritual
exchange where seducer and seduced constantly raise the stakes
in a game that never ends. And cannot end since the dividing
line .that defines the victory of the one and the defeat of the
other, is illegible. And because there is no limit to, the challenge
to love more than one is loved, or to be always more seduced
- if not death . Sex, on the other hand, has a quick, banal end:
the orgasm, the immediate form of desire's realization.
In analysis, one can see the extreme danger that
may be incurred by a man who begins to listen
to a woman's demand for sexual pleasure. If,
through her desire, a woman alters the unalterability within which a man cannot help but'enclose
her, if she herself becomes an immediate and
limitless demand, if she no longer remains within

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 23

this enclosure and is no longer held by it, the man
finds himselfcast into a subsuicidal state. A demand
that tolerates no delay, no excuse, that is limitless
with regard to intensity and duration, shatters the
absolute represented by woman, by feminine sexuality, and even by feminine pleasure . . . .Feminine
sexual pleasure can always be rendered divine
again, and thus controlled, reduced to the coolness of marble breasts, whereas the demand for
enjoyment made by a woman to the man who is
bound to her without being able to flee, causes
him to lose his bearings and the feeling of pure
contingency . . . When all desire is channelled into
the demand for enjoyment, the world turns upside down and bursts asunder. This is doubtless
why our culture has taught women to demand
nothing in order to induce them to desire
nothing . . .'
And this "desire, all of which is channelled into the demand
for enjoyment"? Does it still concern woman's "desire"? Isn't
this a form of madness, which has but little to do with "liberation"? What is this new, feminine figure of unlimited sexual demand, an unlimited claim to sexual gratification? This, in effect,
is the end point to which our culture is rushing - and Roustang
is right, it conceals a form of subsuicidal collective violence .
And not just for men, but for women too, and for sexuality in
general.
We say no to those who love only women ; those
who love only men; those who love only children
(there are also the elderly, sados, machos, dogs,
cats) . . . The new militant, with his refined egocentricism, claims a right to his sexual racism . But we
say no to all sectarianism . If one must become a
misogynist to be a pederast, an androphobe to be

1 . Frani;ois Roustang, Dire Mastery (Baltimore : Johns Hopkins Press, 1982), pp. 104-5 .

24 SEDUCTION

a lesbian, . ..if one must reject the pleasures of the
night, chance encounters, and pick-ups in order
to defend oneself against rape, then in the name
of a struggle against certain prohibitions, one has
returned to other taboos, moralisms, norms,
blinkers .. .
Within our body we experience not one sex, not
two, but a multitude of sexes. We do not see a man,
or woman, but a human being, anthropomorphic(!). . . Our bodies are tired of all the stereotyped
cultural barriers, all the physiological segregation. . .
We are male and female, adults and children, fairies,
dykes, and gays, fuckers and fucked, buggers and
buggered. We do not accept the reduction of all
our sexual richness to a single sex . Our sapphism
is only one facet of our sexuality. We refuse'to limit
ourselves to what society demands of us, that is,
that we be either hetero, lesbian, gay the whole
gamut of promotional products . We are unreasonable in all our desires.
Judith Belladonna Barbara Penton
Libd, July 1978
The frenzy of unlimited sex, an exacerbated ventilation of
desire onto demand and gratification - doesn't this constitute
a reversal of what Roustang described: if until now women were
taught to demand nothing in order that they desired nothing,
are they not now being taught to demand everything in order
to desire nothing? The entire black continent decoded by sexual gratification?
Masculinity would be closer to the Law, femininity closer to
sexual pleasure . But is not such pleasure the axiomatics of a
decoded sexual universe - the feminine and liberating reference produced by the gradual enfeeblement of the Law, the Law
becoming an injunction to pleasure after having been its interdiction. kn effect of simulation inverted : it is when pleasure
seeks openly to be autonomous, that it is truly a product of
the Law. Or else the Law collapses, and where the Law disappears, pleasure is inaugurated as a new contract . What does it

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 2 5

matter : nothing has changed, and the inversion of signs is but
a consequence of strategy. This is the significance of the present
turnaround, and of the twin privileging of the feminine and
pleasure over the masculine and prohibition that once dominated sexual reason . The exaltation of the feminine is a perfect
instrument for the unprecedented generalization and controlled
extension of sexual Reason .
An unexpected fate, one that cuts short all the illusions of
desire and all the rationalizations of liberation. Marcuse:
What within a patriarchal system appears as the
feminine antithesis of masculine values would then
truly constitute a repressed social and historical
alternative - the socialist alternative. . . To do away
with patriarchal society is to deny all the particular qualities attributed to women as women, and
thus to extend these qualities to all sectors of social life, to work and leisure alike. Women's liberation would then be, simultaneously, the liberation
of men. . .
Actuels, Galilde, p. 33 .
Suppose the feminine liberated and placed at the service of
a new collective Eros (the same modus operandi as for the death
drive - the same dialectic aligned with the new social Eros) .
But what happens if the feminine, far from being a set of specific
qualities (which it may have been when repressed, but only
then), proves, once "liberated," to be the expression of an erotic
indetermination, and of the loss of any specific qualities, as
much in the social as the sexual sphere?
The situation of the feminine was quite ironic in seduction,
and is just as ironic today in its indetermination and equivocation ; for its promotion as subject is accompanied by its return
as object, that is to say, as generalized pornography. A strange
coincidence. Women's liberation would very much like to cast
the deciding vote against this objectification . But the cause is
hopeless, for the significance of the liberation of the feminine
lies in its radical ambiguity. Even Roustang's text, which tends
to support the flood of female demands, cannot but have a

26

SEDUCTION

presentiment of the catastrophe that the channelling of all desire
into the demand for gratification constitutes. Unless one considers the subsuicidal state of men provoked by this demand
as a decisive argument, there is nothing that lets one distinguish
the monstrosity of this demand for female gratification from
the monstrosity of its total interdiction in years past.
A similar ambiguity can be found in the male and his weakness. The panic men feel when faced with the `,`liberated" female subject is equalled only by their fragility before the
pornographic chasm of the "alienated" female sex, the female
sex object . Whether a woman demands sexual satisfaction "by
becoming conscious of the rationality of her desire," or offers
herself in a state of total prostitution - whether the female be
subject or object, liberated or prostituted, her sex is to be
devouring, a gaping voracity. It is no accident that all pornography turns around the female sex . This is because erections
are never certain (no scenes of impotence in pornography, they
are averted by the hallucination of unrestrained feminine supply) : In a sexuality made problematic by demands to prove and
demonstrate itself without discontinuity, the marked position,
the masculine position, will be fragile. By contrast, the female
sex remains equal to itself in its availability, in its chasm, its
degree zero. The continuity of female sexuality, as opposed to
male intermittency, is enough to ensure its superiority at the
level of the organic representation of sexual pleasure, the
representation of endless sex that has come to dominate our
fantasies.
Sexual liberation, like that of the productive forces, is potentially limitless. It demands a profusion come true, a "sexually
affluent society." It can no more tolerate a scarcity of sexual
goods, than of material goods. Now, this utopian continuity
and availability can only be incarnated by the female sex. This
is why in this society everything - objects, goods, services, relations of all types - will be ferninized, sexualized in a feminine fashion. In advertising it is not so much a matter of adding
sex to washing machines (which is absurd) as conferring on objects the imaginary, female quality of being available at will, of
never being retractile or aleatory.
In pornography sexuality is lulled by this yawning monoto-

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX

27

ny, where flaccid or erectile men play only a nominal role. Hard
core has changed nothing: the male is no longer interesting because too determined, too marked - the phallus as canonical
signifier - and thus too fragile. Fascination moves towards the
neuter, towards an indeterminate chasm, a mobile, diffuse sexuality. The feminine's historical revenge after so many centuries of repression and frigidity? Perhaps, but more likely, the
exhaustion of sexuality, whether it be the masculine sexuality
that once nourished all the schemes of erectility, verticality,
ascendancy, growth, production, etc., and is at present lost in
the obsessive simulation of all these themes - or a feminine
sexuality, as incarnated from time immemorial in seduction. Today, behind the mechanical objectification of the signs of sex,
it is the masculine as fragile, and the feminine as degree zero
which have the upper hand .
We are indeed in an original situation as regards sexual violence - violence done to the "subsuicidal" male by unbridled,
female sensualism . But it is not a matter of a reversal of the historical violence done to women by male sexual force. The violence involved here is relative to the neutralization, depression
and collapse of the marked term before the irruption of the
non-marked term . It is not a real, generic violence, but a violence of dissuasion, the violence of the neuter, the violence of
the degree zero.
So too is pornography: the violence of sex neutralized .

STEREO-PORNO
Take me to your room and fuck:
me. There is something indefinable in
your vocabulary; something left ; to be
desired.

Philip Dick

The Schizos' Ball

71crning everything into reality ,

Jimmy Cliff

The trompe l'oeil removes a dimension from real space, and
this accounts for its seduction . Pornography by contrast adds
a dimension to the space of sex, it makes the latter more real
than the real - and this accounts for its absence of seduction.
There is no need to search for the phantasies that haunt pornography (fetishisms, perversions, primal scenes, etc.,), for they
are barred by an excess of "reality." Perhaps pornography is only
an allegory, that is to say, a forcing of signs, a baroque enterprise of over-signification touching on the "grotesque" (literally, "grotesque" garden art added to a rocky nature as
pornography adds the vividness; of anatomical detail).
The obscenity itself burns and consumes its object . One sees
from up close what one has never seen before ; to one's good
fortune, one has never seen one's genitals function from so close,
nor for that matter, from so general a perspective. It is all too

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 29

true, too near to be true. And it is this that is fascinating, this
excess of reality, this hyperreality of things . The only phantasy
in pornography, if there is one, is thus not a phantasy of sex,
but of the real, and its absorption into something other than
the real, the hyperreal. Pornographic voyeurism is not a sexual
voyeurism, but a voyeurism of representation and its perdition,
a dizziness born of the loss of the scene and the irruption of
the obscene.
Consequent to the anatomical zoom, the dimension of the
real is abolished, the distance implied by the gaze gives way
to an instantaneous, exacerbated representation, that of sex in
its pure state, stripped not just of all seduction, but of its image's very potentiality. Sex so close that it merges with its own
representation : the end of perspectival space, and therefore, that
of the imaginary and of phantasy - end of the scene, end of
an illusion .
Obscenity, however, is not pornography. Traditional obscenity
still contains an element of transgression, provocation, or perversion. It plays on repression, with phantasies of violence. With
sexual liberation this obscenity disappears : Marcuse's "repressive desublimation" goes this route (and even if it has not passed
into general mores, the mythical triumph of release today, like
that of repression yesterday, is total) . The new obscenity, like
the new philosophy (la nouvelle philosophy) arises on the burying grounds of the old, and has another meaning. It does not
play with violent sex, sex with real stakes, but with sex neutralized by tolerance . Sex here is outrageously "rendered," but
it is the rendering of something that has been removed . Pornography is its artificial synthesis, its ceremony but not its
celebration. Something neo or retro, like those green spaces
that substitute their chlorophyl effects for a defunct nature, and
for this reason, partake of the same obscenity as pornography.
Modern unreality no longer implies the imaginary, it engages
more reference, more truth, more exactitude - it consists in having everything pass into the absolute evidence of the real . As
in hyperrealist paintings (the paintings of the "magic realists")
where one can discern the grain of the face's skin, an unwonted microscopics that lacks even the charm of the uncanny.
Hyperrealism is not surrealism, it is a vision that hunts down

30 SEDUCTION

seduction by means of visibility. One "gives you more ." This
is already true of colour in film or television. One gives you
so much - colour, lustre, sex, all in high fidelity; and with all
the accents (that's life!) - that you have nothing to add, that
is to say, nothing to give in exchange. Absolute represssion: by
giving you a little too much one takes away everything. Beware
of what has been so well "rendered," when it is being returned
to you without you ever having; given it!
A bewildering, claustrophobic and obscene image, that of
Japanese quadrophonics: an ideally conditioned 'room, fantastic technique, music in four dimensions, not just the three of
the environing space, but a fourth, visceral dimension of internal space. The technical delirium of_ the perfect restitution of
music (Bach, Monteverdi, Mozart!) that has never existed , that
no one has ever heard, and that was not meant to be heard like
this . Moreover, one does not "hear" it, for the distance that allows one to hear music, at a concert or somewhere else, is
abolished. Instead it permeates one from all side's ; there is no
longer any musical space; it is the simulation of a total environment that dispossesses one of even the minimal analytic perception constitutive of music's charm. The Japanese have
simple-mindedly, and in complete good faith, confused the real
with the greatest number of dimensions possible.'If they could
construct hexaphonics, they would do it. Now, it is by this fourth
dimension.which they have added to music, that they castrate
you of all musical pleasure . Something else fascinates (but no
longer seduces) you: technical perfection, "high fidelity," which
is just as obsessive and puritanical as the other, conjugal fidelity This time, however, one no longer even knows what object
it is faithful to, for no one knows where the real begins or ends,
nor understands, therefore, the fever of perfectibility that persists in the real's reproduction .
Technique in this sense digs its own grave. For at the same
time that it perfects the means of synthesis, it deepens the criteria of analysis and definition to such an extent that total faithfulness, exhaustiveness as regards the real becomes forever
impossible. The real becomes a vertiginous phantasy of exactitude lost in the infinitismal .
In comparison with, for example, the trompe-l beil, which

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX

31

saves on one dimension, "normal" three-dimensional space is
already debased and impoverished by virtue of an excess ofmeans (all that is real, or wants to be real, constitutes a debasement of this type). Quadrophonics, hyperstereo, or hifi
constitute a conclusive debasement.
Pornography is the quadrophonics of sex. It adds a third and
fourth track to the sexual act. It is the hallucination of detail
that rules. Science has already habituated us to this microscopics,
this excess of the real in its microscopic detail, this voyeurism
of exactitude - a close-up of the invisible structures of the cell
- to this notion of an inexorable truth that can no longer be
measured with reference to the play of appearances, and that
can only be revealed by a sophisticated technical apparatus. End
of the secret .
What else does pornography do, in its sham vision, than reveal
the inexorable, microscopic truth of sex? It is directly descended
from a metaphysics that supposes the phantasy of a hidden truth
and its revelation, the phantasy of "repressed" energy and its
production - on the obscene scene of the real. Thus the impasse of enlightened thought when asked, should one censure
pornography and choose a well-tempered repression? There can
be no definitive response in the affirmative, for pornography
has reason on its side ; it is part of the devastation of the real,
of the insane illusion of the real and its objective "liberation ."
One cannot liberate the productive forces without wanting to
"liberate" sex in its brute function ; they are both equally obscene. The realist corruption of sex, the productivist corruption of labour - same symptoms, same combat .
The equivalent of the conveyor belt here, is the Japanese vaginal cyclorama - it outdoes any strip-tease. Prostitutes, their thighs
open, sitting on the edge of a platform, Japanese workers in
their shirt-sleeves (it is a popular spectacle), permitted to shove
their noses up to their eyeballs within the woman's vagina in
order to see, to see better - but what? They clamber over each
other in order to gain access, and all the while the prostitutes
speak to them gently, or rebuke them sharply for the sake of
form. The rest of the spectacle, the flagellations, the reciprocal
masturbation and traditional strip-tease, pales before this moment of absolute obscenity, this moment of visual voracity that

32

SEDUCTION

goes far beyond sexual possession. A sublime pornography: if
they could do it, these guys would be swallowed up whole within the prostitute. An exaltation with death? Perhaps, but at
the same time they are comparing and commenting on the
respective vaginas in mortal seriousness, without ever smiling
or breaking out in laughter, and without ever trying to touch
- except when playing by the rules. No lewdness, but an extremely serious, infantile act borne of an undivided fascination
with the mirror of the female organ, like Narcissus' fascination
with his own image . Beyond the conventional idealism of the
strip-tease (perhaps there might even be some seduction here),
pornography at its most sublime reverses itself into a purified
obscenity, an obscenity that is purer, deeper, more visceral . But
why stop with nudity, or the genitalia? If the obscene is a matter of representation and not of sex, it must explore the very
interior of the body and the viscera. Who knows what profound
pleasure is to be found in the visual dismemberment of mucous membranes and smooth muscles? Our pornography still
retains a restricted definition. Obscenity has an unlimited future .
But take heed, it is not a matter of the deepening of a drive ;
what is involved is an orgy of realism, an orgy of production .
A rage (perhaps also a drive, but one that substitutes itself for
all the others) to summon everything before the jurisdiction
of signs. Let everything be rendered in the light of the sign,
in the light of a visible energy. Let all speech be liberated and
proclaim desire . We are reveling, in this liberalization, which,
in fact, simply marks the growing; progress of obscenity. All that
is hidden and still enjoys a forbidden status, will be unearthed,
rendered to speech and made to bow before the facts. The real
is growing ever larger, some day the entire universe will be real,
and when the real is universal, there will be death.

Pornographic simulation : nudity is never anything but an extra sign . Nudity veiled by clothing functions as a secret, ambivalent referent. Unveiled, it surfaces as a sign and returns to
the circulation of signs: nudity de-sign. The same occurs with
hard core and blue porn : the sexual organ, whether erect or

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 33

open wide is just another sign in the hypersexual panoply.
Phallus-design . The more one advances willy-nilly in sex's veracity, in the exposure of its workings, the more immersed one
becomes in the accumulation of signs, and the more enclosed
one becomes in the endless over-signification of a real that no
longer exists, and of a body that never existed. Our entire body
culture, with its concern for the "expression" of the body's
"desires," for the stereophonics of desire, is a culture of irredeemable monstrosity and obscenity.
Hegel: "Just as when speaking of the exteriority of the human body, we said that its entire surface, in contrast to that of
the animal world, reveals the presence and pulsation of the
heart, we say of art that it has as its task to create in such a way
that at all points of its surface the phenomenal, the appearance
becomes an eye, the seat of the soul, rendering itself visible
to the spirit ." There is, therefore, never any nudity, never any
nude body that is simply nude ; there is never just a body. It
is like the Indian said when the white man asked him why he
ran around naked: "For me, it is all face ." In a non-fetishistic
culture (one that does not fetishize nudity as objective truth)
the body is not, as in our own, opposed to the face, conceived
as alone rich in expression and endowed with "eyes" : it is itself a face, and looks at you. It is therefore not obscene, that
is to say, made to be seen nude . It cannot be seen nude, no
more than the face can for us, for the body is - and is only
- a symbolic veil ; and it is by way of this play of veils, which,
literally, abolishes the body "as such," that seduction occurs .
This is where seduction is at play and not in the tearing away
of the veil in the name of some manifestation of truth or desire .
The indistinction of face and body in a total culture of appearances - the distinction between face and body in a culture of meaning (the body here becomes monstrously visible,
it becomes the sign of a monster called desire) - then the total
triumph in pornography of the obscene body, to the point
where the face is effaced. The erotic models are faceless, the
actors are neither beautiful, ugly, or expressive ; functional nudity effaces everything in the "spectacularity" of sex. Certain
films are no more than visceral sound-effects of a coital closeup; even the body disappears, dispersed amongst oversize, par-

34

SEDUCTION

tial objects. Whatever the face, it remains inappropriate, for it
breaks the obscenity and reintroduces meaning where everything aspires to abolish it in sexual excess and a nihilistic vertigo.
At the end of this terrorist debasement, where the body (and
its "desire") are made to yield to the evidence, appearances no
longer have any secret . A culture of the desublimation of appearances: everything is materialized in accord with the most
objective categories . A pornographic culturepar excellence ; one
that pursues the workings of the real at all times and in all places .
A pornographic culture with its ideology of the concrete, of
facticity and use, and its concern with the preeminence of use
value, the material infrastructure of things, and the body as the
material infrastructure of desire. A one-dimensional culture that
exalts everything in the "concreteness of production" or of
pleasure - unlimited mechanical labour or copulation . What
is obscene about this world is that nothing is left to appearances, or to chance . Everything is a visible, necessary sign . Like
those dolls, adorned with genitalia, that talk, pee; and will one
day make love. And the little girl's reaction : "My little sister, she
knows how to do that too. Can't you give me a real one?"

From the discourse of labour to the discourse of sex, from
the discourse of productive forces to that of drives, one finds
the same ultimatum, that of pro-duction in the literal sense of
the term . Its original meaning, in . fact, was not to fabricate, but
to render visible or make appear. Sex is produced like one
produces a document, or as one says of an actor that he performs (se produit) on stage.
To produce is to materialize by force what belongs to another
order, that of the secret and of seduction. Seduction is, at all
times and in all places, opposed to production . Seduction removes something from the order of the visible, while production constructs everything in full view, be it an object, a number
or concept .
Everything is to be produced, everything is to be legible,
everything is to become real, visible, accountable; everything
is to be transcribed in relations of force, systems of concepts

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 3 5

or measurable energy ; everything is to be said, accumulated,
indexed and recorded . This is sex as it exists in pornography,
but more generally, this is the enterprise of our entire culture,
whose natural condition is obscene: a culture of monstration,
of demonstration, of productive monstrosity.
No seduction here, nor in pornography, given the abrupt
production of sexual acts, and the ferocity of pleasure in its
immediacy. There is nothing seductive about bodies traversed
by a gaze literally sucked in by a vacuum of transparency ; nor
can there be even a hint of seduction within the universe of
production, where a principle of transparency governs the
forces belonging to the world of visible, calculable phenomena - objects, machines, sexual acts, or the gross national
product.

The insoluble equivocalness of pornography: it puts an end to
all seduction via sex, but at the same time it puts an end to
sex via the accumulation of the signs of sex. Both triumphant
parody and simulated agony - there lies its ambiguity. In a sense,
pornography is true : it owes its truth to a system of sexual dissuasion by hallucination, dissuasion of the real by the hyperreal, and of the body by its forced materialization .
Pornography is usually faulted for two reasons - for
manipulating sex in order to defuse the class struggle (always
the old "mystified consciousness") and for corrupting sex (the
good, true sex, the sex to be liberated, the sex to be considered
amongst our natural rights) by its commodification . Pornography, then, is said to mask either the truth of capital and the infrastructure, or that of sex and desire. But in fact pornography
does not mask anything (yes, that is indeed the case). It is not
an ideology, i.e., it does not hide some truth; it is a simulacrum,
i .e., it is a truth effect that hides the truth's non-existence.
Pornography says : there must be good sex somewhere, for
I am its caricature. In its grotesque obscenity, it attempts to save
sex's truth and provide the faltering sexual model with some
credibility. Now, the whole question is whether good sex exists, or whether, quite simply, sex exists, somewhere - sex as

36 SEDUCTION

the body's ideal use value, sex as possible pleasures which can
and must be "liberated ." It is the same question demanded of
political economy : is there "good" value, an ideal use value beyond exchange value understood as the inhuman abstraction
of capital - an ideal value of goods or social relations which
can and must be "liberated"?

SEDUCTION /PRODUCTION
In reality, pornography is but the paradoxical limit of the sexual. A "realistic" exacerbation, a maniacal obsession with the
real : this is the obscene, in the etymological and every other
sense. But is not the sexual itself already a forced materialization? Is not the advent of sexuality already part of occidental
realistics, the compulsion proper to our culture to instantiate
and instrumentalize everything?
It is absurd, when speaking of other cultures, to dissociate
religion, economics, politics, and the legal system (i .e., the social and other classificatory phantasmagorias).for the reason that
such a dissociation has not occurred, these concepts being like
so many diseases with which we infect these cultures in order
to better "understand" them . In the same manner, it is absurd
to autonomize the sexual as a separate instance, an irreducible
given, as something to which other instances or givens can be
reduced . We need a critique of sexual Reason, or rather, a
geneology of sexual Reason similar to Nietzche's geneology of
good and evil, for it is our new morality. One might say of sexuality, as of death: "it is a new wrinkle to which consciousness
became accustomed not so long ago."
We remain perplexed and vaguely compassionate when confronted with cultures for which the sexual act is not a finality

38 SEDUCTION

in itself, for which sexuality does not have the mortal seriousness of an energy to be liberated, of an ejaculation to be forced,
a production at any price, or hygienic auditing of the body. Cultures that preserve lengthy procedures of enticement and sensuality, long series of gifts and counter-gifts, with sex being but
one service amongst others, and the act of love one possible
end-term to a prescribed, ritualistic interchange. Such proceedings no longer make sense to us; ;sex has become, strictly speaking, the actualization of desire in pleasure - all else is literature.
An extraordinary crystalization around the orgasmic, and more
generally, the energizing function .
Ours is a culture of premature ejaculation. Increasingly all
seduction, all manner of enticement - which is always a highly ritualized process - is effaced behind a naturalized sexual
imperative, behind the immediate and imperative ;realization of
desire . Our center of gravity has been displaced towards a libidinal economy concerned with only the naturalization of desire,
a desire dedicated to drives, or to a machine-like functioning,
but above all, to the imaginary of repression and liberation .
Henceforth one no longer says : "You have a soul and it must
be saved," but :
'
"You have a sex, and you must put it to good
use."
"You have an unconscious, and you must. let the
id speak."
"You have a body, and you must derive pleasure from it ."
"You have a libido, and you must expend it," etc.
This pressure towards liquidity, flux and the accelerated articulation of the sexual, psychic and physical body is an exact
replica of that which regulates exchange value: capital must circulate,there must no longer be any fixed point, investments
must be ceaselessly renewed, value must radiate without respite
- this is the form of value's present realization, and sexuality,
the sexual model, is simply its mode of appearance at the level
of the body.
As a model sex takes the form of an individual enterprise
based on natural energy : to each his desire and may the best
man,prevail (in matters of pleasure). It is the selfsame form as

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 39

capital, and this is why sexuality, desire and pleasure are
subaltern values . When they first appeared, not so long ago,
as a system of reference on the horizon of western culture, it
was as fallen, residual values - the ideal of inferior classes, the
bourgeoisie, then the petty-bourgeoisie - relative to the
aristocratic values of birth and blood, valour and seduction,
or the collective values of religion and sacrifice.
Moreover, the body - this selfsame body to which we ceaselessly refer - has no other reality than that implied by the sexual and productive, model. It is capital that, in a single
movement, gives rise to both the energizing body of labour
power, and the body of our dreams, a sanctuary of desires and
drives, of psychic energy and the unconscious, the impulsive
body that, haunts the primary processes - the body itself having become a primary process, and thereby an anti-body, an
ultimate revolutionary referent . The two bodies are simultaneously engendered in repression, and their apparent antagonism
is but a consequence of their reduplication. When one uncovers
in the body's secret places an "unbound" libidinal energy opposed to the "bound" energy of the productive body, when
one uncovers in desire the truth of the body's phantasms and
drives, one is still only disintering the psychic metaphor . of
capital.
Here is your desire, your unconscious: a psychic metaphor
of capital in the rubbish heap of political economy. And the
sexual jurisdiction is but a fantastic extension of the commonplace ideal of private-property, where everyone is assigned a
certain amount of capital to manage: a psychic capital, a libidinal, sexual or unconscious capital, for which each person will
have to answer individually, under the sign of his or her own
liberation.
A fantastic reduction of seduction. This sexuality transformed
by the revolution of desire, this mode of bodily production and
circulation has acquired its present character, has come to be
spoken of in terms of "sexual relations," only by forgetting all
forms of seduction - just as one can speak of the social in terms
of "relations" or "social relations," only after it has lost all symbolic substance.
Wherever sex has been erected into a function, an autono-

40

SEDUCTION

mous instance, it has liquidated seduction . Sex today generally
occurs only in the place, and in place of a missing seduction,
or as the residue and staging of a failed seduction. It is then
the absent form of seduction that is hallucinated sexually -

in the form of desire. The modern theory of desire draws its
force from seduction's liquidation .
Henceforth, in place of a seductive form, there; is a productive form, an "economy" of sex : the retrospective of a drive,
the hallucination of a stock of sexual energy, of an unconscious
in which the repression of desire and its clearance are inscribed.
All this (and the psychic in general) results from the autonomization of sex - as nature and the economy were once the precipitate of the autonomization of production . Nature and desire,
both of them idealized, succeed each other in the progressive
designs for liberation, yesterday the liberation of the productive forces, today that of the body and sex.
One can speak of the birth of the sexual and of sex speech
- just as one speaks of the birth of the clinic andtclinical gaze
- where once there was nothing, if not uncoritroll'ed, unstable,
insensate, or else highly ritualized forms. Where too, it follows,
there was no repression, this thematic with which we have burdened all previous societies even more than our own . We condemn them as primitive from a technological perspective, but
also from a. sexual or psychic perspective, for they conceived
of neither the sexual nor the unconscious. Fortunately, psychoanalysis has come along to lift the burden and reveal what
was hidden. The incredible racism of the truth, the evangelical racism of the Word and its accession.
Where the sexual does not appear of and for itself, we act
as though it were repressed; it is our way of saving it. And yet
to speak of repressed or sublimated sexuality in primitive, feudal or other societies, or simply to speak of "sexuality" and
the unconscious in such cases, is a sign of profound stupidity.
It is not even certain that such talk holds the best key to unlocking our society. On this basis, that is, by calling into question the very hypothesis of sexuality, by questioning sex and
desire as autonomous instances, it is possible to agree with Foucault and say (though not for the same reasons) that in our culture too there is no and never has been any repression either.

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 41

Sexuality as a discourse is, like political economy (and every
other discursive system), only a montage or simulacrum which
has always been traversed, thwarted and exceeded by actual
practice . The coherence and transparency of homo sexualis has
no more existence than the coherence and transparency of

homo economicus .

It is a long process that simultaneously establishes the psychic and the sexual, that establishes the "other scene," that of
the phantasy and the unconscious, at the same time as the energy produced therein - a psychic energy that is merely a direct
consequence of the staged hallucination of repression, an energy
hallucinated as sexual substance, which is then metaphorized
and metonymized according to the various instances (topical,
economic, etc.), and according to all the modalities of secondary and tertiary repression . Psychoanalysis, this most admirable edifice, the most beautiful hallucination of the back-world,
as Nietzsche would say. The extraordinary effectiveness of this
model for the simulation of scenes and energies - an extraordinary theoretical psychodrama, this staging of the psyche, this
scenario of sex as a separate instance and insurmountable reality (akin to the hypostatization of production). What does it
matter if the economic, the biological or the psychic bear the
costs of this staging - of what concern is the "scene" or "the
other scene" : it is the entire scenario of sexuality (and psychoanalysis) as a model of simulation that should be questioned.

It is true that in our culture the sexual has triumphed over
seduction, and annexed it as a subaltern form. Our instrumental vision has inverted everything. For in the symbolic order
seduction is primary, and sex appears only as an addendum .
Sex in this latter order is like the recovery in an analytic cure,
or a birth in a story of Levi-Strauss ; it comes as an extra, without
a relation of cause to effect . This is the secret of "symbolic efficacity" : the world's workings are the result of a mental seduction . Thus the butcher Tchouang Tseu whose understanding
enabled him to describe the cow's interstitial structure without
ever having used the blade of a knife : a sort of symbolic reso-

42

SEDUCTION
i

lution that, as an addendum, has a practical result .
Seduction too works on the mode of symbolic,, articulation,
of a duel* affinity with the structure of the other - sex may
result, as an addendum, but not necessarily. More generally,
seduction is a challenge to the very existence of the sexual order.
And if our "liberation" seems to have reversed the terms and
successfully challenged the order of seduction, it is by no means certain that its victory is not hollow. The question of the
ultimate superiority of the ritual l.ogics of challenge and seduction over the economic logics of sex and production still remains unresolved .
For revolutions and liberations are fragile, while seduction
is inescapable. It is seduction that lies in wait for them - seduced
as they are, despite everything, by the immense setbacks that
turn them from their truth - and again it is seduction that awaits
them even in their triumph. The sexual discourse itself is continually threatened with saying something other; than what it
says .
In an American film a guy pursues a street-walker, prudently, according to form . The woman responds, aggressively : "What
do you-want? Do you want to jump me? Then, change your
approach! Say, I want to jump you!" and the guy, ;troubled, replies : "yes, I want to jump you." "Then go fuck yourself!" And
later, when he is driving. her in his car: "I'll make coffee, and
then you can jump me." In fact, this cynical conversation, which
appears objective, functional, anatomical, and without nuance,
is only a game. Play, challenge, and provocation are just beneath
the surface. Its very brutality is rich with the inflections of love
and complicity. It is a new manner of seduction .
Or this conversation taken from The Schizophrenics' Ball by
Philip Dick :
"Take me to your room and fuck me."
"There is something indefinable in your vocabulary something left to be desired."
i
One can understand this as: Your proposition is unacceptable, it lacks the poetry of desire, it is too direct . But ~in a sense the
text says the exact opposite : that the proposition has some*Trans. note : In French, the word duel means both duel /dual . Baudrillard is clearly playing on the double meaning of the word - agonal relations and reciprocal
challenges . I translate the term `duel', even in its adjectival form .

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX

43

thing "indefinable" about it, which thereby opens the path to
desire. A direct sexual invitation is too direct to be true, and
immediately refers to something else.
The first version deplores the obscenity of the conversation .
The second is more subtle ; it is capable of disclosing a twist
to obscenity - obscenity as an enticement, and thus as an "indefinable" allusion to desire. An obscenity too brutal to be true,
and too impolite to be dishonest - obscenity as a challenge and
therefore, again, as seduction.
In the last instance, a purely sexual statement, a pure demand
for sex, is impossible. One cannot be free of seduction, and
the discourse of anti-seduction is but its last metamorphosis.
It is not just that a pure discourse of sexual demand is absurd given the complexity of affective relations; it quite simply does not exist . To believe in sex's reality and in the possibility
of speaking sex without mediation is a delusion - the delusion
of every discourse that believes in transparency ; it is also that
of functional, scientific, and all other discourses with claims
to the truth . Fortunately, the latter is continually undermined,
dissipated, destroyed, or rather, circumvented, diverted, and
seduced. Surreptitiously they are turned against themselves; surreptitiously they dissolve into a different game, a different set
of stakes .
To be sure, neither pornography nor sexual transactions exercise any seduction . Like nudity, and like the truth, they are
abject . They are the body's disenchanted form, just as sex is
the suppressed and disenchanted form of seduction, just as use
value is the disenchanted form of the object, and just as, more
generally, the real is the suppressed and disenchanted form of
the world.
Nudity will never abolish seduction, for it immediately becomes something else, the hysterical enticements of a different game, one that goes beyond it. There is no degree zero, no
objective reference, no point of neutrality, but always and again,
stakes . Today all our signs appear to be converging - like the
body in nudity and meaning in truth - towards some conclusive objectivity, an entropic and metastable form of the neutral . (What else is the ideal-typical, vacationing nude body, given
over to the sun, itself hygenic and neutralized, with its luciferi-

44 SEDUCTION

an parody of burning) . But is there ever a cessation of signs
at some zero point of the real or the neutral? Isn't there always
a reversion of the neutral itself into a new spiral of. stakes, seduction and death .
What seduction used to lie concealed in sex? What new seduction, what new challenge lies concealed in the abolition of what,
within sex, was once at stake? (The same question on another
plane : What challenge, what source of fascination, lies concealed
in the masses, in the abolition of what was once at stake with
the social?)
All descriptions of disenchanted systems, all hypotheses about
the disenchantment of systems - the flood of simulation and
dissuasion, the abolition of symbolic processes, the death of
referentials - are perhaps false. The neutral is never neutral ; it
becomes an object of fascination . But does it then become an
object of seduction?

Agonistic logics, logics of ritual and seduction ., are stronger
than sex . Like power, sex never has the last word . In The Empire of The Senses, a film that from end to end is occupied with
the sex act, the latter, by its very persistence, comes to be possessed by the logic of another order. The film is, unintelligible
in terms of sex, for sexual pleasure, by itself, leads to everything but death. But the madness that seizes hold of the couple (a madness only for us, in reality it is a rigourous logic)
pushes them to extremes, where: meaning no longer has sense
and the exercise of the senses is not in the least sensual. Nor
is it intelligible in terms of mysticism or metaphysics. Its logic
is one of challenge, impelled by the two partners outbidding
each other. Or more precisely, the key event is the passage from
a logic of pleasure at the beginning, where the man leads the
game, to a logic of challenge and death, that occurs under the
impetus of the woman - who thereby becomes the game's mistress, even if at first she was only a. sexual object . It is the feminine principle that brings about. the reversal of sex/value into
an agonistic logic of seduction .
There is here no perversion or morbid drive, no interpreta-

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 45

tion drawn from our psycho-sexual frontiers, no "affinity" of
Eros for Thanatos nor any ambivalence of desire. It is not a matter of sex, nor of the unconscious. The sexual act is viewed
as a ritual act, ceremonial or warlike, for which (as .in ancient
tragedies on the theme of incest) death is the mandatory denouement, the emblematic form of the challenge's fulfillment.

Thus the obscene can seduce, as can sex and pleasure. Even
the most anti-seductive figures can become figures of seduction. (It has been said of the feminist discourse that, beyond
its total absence of seduction, there lies a certain homosexual
allure). These figures need only move beyond their truth into
a reversible configuration, a configuration that is also that of
their death. The same holds true for that figure of anti-seduction
par excellence, power.
Power seduces. But not in the vulgar sense of the masses'
desire for complicity (a tautology that ultimately seeks to ground
seduction in the desire ofothers) . No, power seduces by virtue
of the reversibility that haunts it, and on which a minor cycle
is instituted. No more dominant and dominated, no more.victims and executioners (but "exploiters" and "exploited," they
certainly exist, though quite separately, for there is no reversibility in production - but then nothing essential happens at
this level) . No more separate positions : power is realized according to a duel relation, whereby it throws a challenge to society, and its existence is challenged in return . If power cannot
be "exchanged" in accord with this minor cycle of seduction,
challenge and ruse, then it quite simply disappears .
At bottom, power does not exist. The unilateral character of
of the relation of forces on which the "structure" and "reality" of power and its perpetual movement are supposedly instituted, does not exist. This is the dream of power imposed
by reason, not its reality. Everything seeks its own death, including power. Or rather, everything demands to be exchanged,
reversed, and abolished within a cycle (this is why neither
repression nor the unconscious exist, for reversibility is always
already there) . This alone is profoundly seductive. Power

46

SEDUCTION

seduces only when it becomes a challenge to itself; otherwise
it is just an exercise, and satisfies only the hegemonic logic of
reason .
Seduction is stronger than power because it is reversible and
mortal, while power, like value, seeks to be irreversible, cumulative and immortal . Power partakes of all the illusions of production, and of the real ; it wants to be real, and so tends to become
its own imaginary, its own superstition (with the help of theories that analyze it, be they to contest it) . Seduction, on the
other hand, is not of the order of the real - and is never of the
order of force, nor relations of force. But precisely for this reason, it enmeshes all power's real actions, as well as the entire
reality of production, in this unremitting reversibility and disaccumulation - without which there would be neither power
nor accumulation.

It is the emptiness behind, or at the very heart of power and
production; it is this emptiness that today gives them their last
glimmer of reality. Without that which reverses, annuls, and
seduces them, they would never have had the authority of
reality.
The real, moreover, has never interested anyone. It is a place
of disenchantment, a simulacrum of accumulation against death .
And there is nothing more tiresome. What sometimes renders
the real fascinating - and the truth as well - is the imaginary
catastrophe which lies behind it. . Do you think that power, sex,
economics - all these real, really big things - would have held
up for a single moment unless sustained by fascination, a fascination that comes precisely from the mirror image in which
they are reflected, from their continuous reversion, the palpable pleasure borne of their imminent catastrophe?
The real, particularly in the present, is nothing more than
the stockpiling of dead matter, dead bodies and dead language
- a residual sedimentation . Still we feel more secure when the
stock of reality is assessed (the; ecological lament speaks of
material energies, but it conceals that what is disappearing is
the real's energy, the real's reality, the possibility' of its management, whether capitalist or revolutionary) . If the horizon of
production is beginning to vanish, that of speech, sex or desire
can still take up the slack . To liberate, to give pleasure, to give

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 47
a speech, to give speech to others : this is real, it is something
substantial, with a prospect of stocks. And, therefore, it is power.
Unfortunately not . That is to say, not for long . This "reality"
is slowly dissipating. One wants sex, like power, to become an
irreversible instance, and desire an irreversible energy (a stock
of energy - desire, need it be said, is never far from capital) .
For we grant meaning only to what is irreversible : accumulation, progress, growth, production . Value, energy and desire
imply irreversible processes - that is the very meaning of their
liberation . (Inject the smallest dose of reversibility into our economic, political, sexual or institutional mechanisms, and everything collapses) . This is what today assures sexuality of its
mythical authority over hearts and bodies . But it is also what
lies behind the fragility of sex, and of the entire edifice of
production .
Seduction is stronger than production . It is stronger than sexuality, with which it must never be confused . It is not something internal to sexuality, though this is what it is generally
reduced to . It is a circular, reversible process of challenges,
oneupmanship and death. It is, on the contrary, sex that is the
debased form, circumscribed as it is by the terms of energy and
desire .
Seduction's entanglement with production and power, the
irruption of a minimal reversibility within every irreversible
process, such that the latter are secretly undermined, while
simultaneously ensured of that minimal continuum of pleasure without which they would be nothing - this is what must
be analyzed . At the same time knowing that production constantly seeks to eliminate seduction in order to establish itself
on an economy of relations of force alone ; and that sex, the
production of sex, seeks to eliminate seduction in order to establish itself on an economy of relations of desire alone.

This is why one must completely turn round what Foucault
has to say in The History of Sexuality I, while still accepting
its central hypothesis . Foucault sees only the production of sex
as discourse. He is fascinated by the irreversible deployment

48

SEDUCTION

and interstitial saturation of a field of speech, which is at the
same time the institution of a field of power, culminating in
a field of knowledge that reflects (or invents) it. But from
whence does power derive its somnambulistic functionality, this
irresistible vocation to saturate space? If neither ;sociality nor
sexuality exist unless reclaimed and staged by power, perhaps
power too does not exist unless reclaimed and staged by
knowledge (theory) . In which case, the entire ensemble should
be placed in simulation, and this too perfect mirror inverted,
even if the "truth effects" it produces are marvelously
decipherable .
Furthermore, the equation of power with knowledge, this
convergence of mechanisms over a field of rule they have seemingly swept clean, this conjunction described by Foucault as
complete and operational, is perhaps only the concurrence of
two dead stars whose last glimmerings still illuminate each other,
though they have lost their own radiance? In their original,
authentic phase, knowledge and power were opposed to each
other, sometimes violently (as were, moreover, sex and power). But if today they are merging, is this not due to the progressive extenuation of their reality principle, of their distinctive
characteristics, their specific energies? Their conjunction then
would herald not a reinforced positivity, but a twin indifferentiation, at the end of which only their phantoms would , remain,
mingling amongst themselves, left to haunt us .
In the last instance, behind the apparent stasis of knowledge
and power which appears to arise from all sides, there would
lie only the metastasis of power, the cancerous proliferation
of a disturbed, disorganized structure. If power today is general, and can be detected at all levels ("molecular" power), if it
has become cancerous, with its cells proliferating uncontrollably, without regard to the good old "genetic code" of politics,
this is because it is itself afflicted and in a state of advanced
decomposition. Or perhaps it is afflicted. with hyperreality and
in an acute crisis of simulation (the cancerous proliferation of
only the signs of power) and, accordingly, has reached a state
of general diffusion and saturation . Its somnambulistic operationality.
One must therefore always wager on simulation and take the

THE ECLIPTIC OF SEX 49

signs from behind - signs that, when taken at face value and
in good faith, always lead to the reality and evidence ofpower.
Just as they lead to the reality and evidence of sex and production . It is this positivism that must not be taken at face value;
and it is to this reversion of power in simulation one must devote one's efforts. Power will never do it by itself, and Foucault's
text should be criticized for failing to do it and, therefore, for
reviving the illusion of power.
The whole, obsessed as it is with maximizing power and sex,
must be questioned as to its emptiness. Given its obsession with
power as continuous expansion and investment, one must ask
it the question of the reversion of the space of power, and of
the reversion of the space of sex and its speech . Given its fascination with production, one must ask it the question of
seduction .

II
SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

V
THE SACRED HORIZON OF APPEARANCES
Seduction takes from discourse its sense and turns it from
its truth. It is, therefore, contrary to the psychoanalytic distinction between manifest and latent discourses . For the latent discourse turns the manifest discourse not from its truth, but
towards its truth . It makes the manifest discourse say what it
does not want to say; it causes determinations and profound
indeterminations to show through in the manifest discourse.
Depth always peeks through from behind the break, and meaning peeks from behind the line . The manifest discourse has the
status of an appearance, a laboured appearance, traversed by
the emergence of meaning. Interpretation is what breaks the
appearance and play of the manifest discourse and, by taking
up with the latent discourse, delivers the real meaning.
In seduction, by contrast, it is the manifest discourse - discourse at its most superficial - that turns back on the deeper
order (whether conscious or unconscious) in order to invalidate it, substituting the charm and illusion of appearances. These
appearances are not in the least frivolous, but occasions for a
game and its stakes, and a passion for deviation - the seduction of the signs themselves being more important than the
emergence of any truth - which interpretation neglects and destroys in its search for hidden meanings. This is why interpretation is what, par excellence, is opposed to seduction, and why

5 4 SEDUCTION

it is the least seductive of discourses . Not only does it subject
the domain of appearances to incalculable damage, but this
privileged search for hidden meanings may well be profoundly in error. For it is not somewhere else, in a hinterwelt or an
unconscious, that one will find what leads discourse astray. What
truly displaces discourse, "seduces" it in the literal sense, and
renders it seductive, is its very appearance, its inflections, its
nuances, the circulation (whether aleatory and senseless, or ritualized and meticulous) of signs at its surface. It is this that effaces meaning and is seductive, while a discourse's meaning has
never seduced anyone. All meaningful discourse seeks to end
appearances : this is its attraction, and its imposture. It is also
an impossible undertaking . Inexorably, discourse is left to its
appearances, and thus to the stakes of . seduction, thus to its own
failure as discourse . But perhaps discourse is secretly tempted by this failure, by the bracketing of its objectives, of its truth
effects which become absorbed within a surface that swallows
meaning. This is what happens at first, when discourse seduces
itself; it is the original form by which discourse becomes absorbed within itself and emptied of its truth in order to better
fascinate others : the primitive seduction of language .
Every discourse is complicit in this rapture, in this deviation,
and if it does not do it itself, then others will do: it in its place.
All appearances conspire to combat and root : out meaning
(whether intentional or otherwise), and turn it into a game, into
another of the game's rules, a more arbitrary rule - or into
another elusive ritual, one that is more adventurous and seductive than the directive line of meaning. What discourse must
fight against is not so much the unconscious secret as the superficial abyss of its own appearance ; and if discourse must triumph over something, it is not over phantasies and
hallucinations heavy with meaning and misinterpretation, but
the shiny surface of non-sense and all the games, that the latter
renders possible . It was only a short while ago that one succeeeded in eliminating this stake of seduction (which has as
its concern the sacred horizon of appearances) in order to substitute a stake "in depth," a stake in the unconscious, or in interpretation . But this substitution is fragile and ephemeral. No
one knows if the reigning obsession with latent discourse one

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

55

finds in psychoanalysis (which in effect, generalizes the violence of interpretation to all levels), if this mechanism with
which one has eliminated (or sought to eliminate) all seduction
is not itself a model of simulation - a rather fragile one that
gives itself the semblance of being insurmountable in order to
better conceal all parallel effects, and most notably, the effects
of seduction that are beginning to work their damage. For what
is most damaging to psychoanalysis is the realization that the
unconscious seduces: it seduces by its dreams and by its concept; it seduces as soon as the id speaks and even as the id wishes
to speak . A double structure emerges, a parallel structure of the
connivance of the signs of the unconscious and their exchange,
which eats away at the other structure, the hard, pure structure of unconscious "labour" and transference and countertransference. The entire psychoanalytic edifice perishes of its
own seduction, and with it all the others . Let us be analysts
for one blazing instant, and say that it is the revenge of the
repressed, the repression of seduction, that is at the origin of
psychoanalysis as a "science," within the intellectural trajectory of Freud himself.
The Freudian oeuvre unfolds between two poles_ that radically put into question the intermediary construction, these
poles being seduction and the death drive. We have already
spoken in L'Ecbange symbolique et la mort of the latter, considered as an inversion of the earlier psychoanalytic apparatus
(topical, economic). Regarding the former, which after numerous turns links up with the death drive by some secret affinity,
one has to say that it appears as psychoanalysis' lost object .
It is classic to consider Freud's abandonment of
the theory of seduction (1907) as a decisive step
in the emergence of psychoanalytic theory and in
moving to the foreground the notions of unconscious phantasy, psychic reality, infantile sexuality,
etc.
Laplanche and Pontalis
Vocabulaire de la psychanalyse

56

SEDUCTION

Seduction, as an original form, is considered related to the
state of the "primal phantasy"and thus treated, according to a
logic that is not longer its own, as a residue, a vestige, or
screen/formation in the henceforth triumphant logic and structure of psychic and sexual reality. But instead of considering
seduction's downgrading as necessary to psychoanalysis'
growth, one shoud think of it as a crucial event, heavy with
consequences . As we know, seduction will disappear from psychoanalytic discourse, or will reappear only to be burried and
forgotten, in accord with a logical repetition of the foundational
act of denial by the master himself. It is not simply set aside
as something secondary relative to the more decisive elements
like infantile sexuality, repression, Oedipus, etc.; it is denied as
a dangerous form that could well threaten the development and
coherence of the ulterior edifice.
Exactly the same thing occurs in Saussure as in Freud. Saussure also began, in the Anagrammes, with a description of a
form of language, or more precisely, of its subversion - a ritualized, meticulous form of the deconstruction of meaning and
value. But then he took it all back and moved on to the construction of linguistics. Was this turn due to the manifest failure
of his attempted proofs, or did it involve a renunciation of the
anagrammatical challenge in order to undertake the more constructive, durable and scientific development of the mode of
production of meaning, to the exclusion of its possible subversion? But what does it matter, the fact is that linguistics was
born from this irrevocable redeployment, and it constitutes the
fundamental axiom and rule for all those who continue Saussure's work . One does not return to the scene of, the crime, and
the forgetting of the original murder is part of the logical and
triumphant unfolding of science. All the energy of the dead object and its last rites passes into the simulated resurrection of
the living . Still it must be said that Saussure, at least, had the
intutition towards the end that his linguistic enterprise had failed,
leaving a hovering uncertainty, the glimpse of a weakness, of
the possibly illusory character of so beautiful a mechanism of
substitution . But such scruples, within which one can perceive
something of the premature and violent burial of the
Anagrammes, would be totally foreign to his heirs, who remain

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 57

content to manage the discipline without ever touching on the
idea of an abyss of language, an abyss of linguistic seduction,
a radically different operation that absorbs rather than produces
meaning. The sarcophagus of linguistics was tightly sealed, and
fell upon the shroud of the signifier.

Thus the shroud of psychoanalysis has fallen over seduction,
the shroud of hidden meanings and of a hidden excess of meaning, at the expense of the surface ofabsorption, the superficial
abyss of appearances, the instantaneous and panicky surface
of the exchange and rivalry of signs constituted by seduction
(hysteria being but a "symptomatic" manifestation of the latter, one that has already been contaminated by the latent structure of the symptom, and is thus pre-psychoanalytic, thus
degraded - which is why it was able to,,serve as a "conversion
matrix" for psychoanalysis). Freud abolished seduction in order
to put into place a machinery of interpretation, and of sexual
repression, that offer all the characteristics of objectivity and
coherence. Assuming that one disregards all the internal convulsions of psychoanalysis, be they personal or theoretical, that
undermine its beautiful coherence - lest all the challenges and
seductions buried under the discourse's rigour reemerge like
the living dead. (But doesn't this suggest, so the beautiful souls
will argue, that, at bottom, psychoanalysis is still alive?). Freud
may have broken with seduction and taken the side of interpretation (at least until the last metapsychology which, very
definitely, moves in a different direction), but all that was
repressed by this admirable realignment has reemerged within
the conflicts and vicissitudes of psychoanalysis' history, and within the course of almost every cure (one is never finished with
hysteria!) . And it is not an inconsiderable source of entertainment to see seduction sweep across psychoanalysis with Lacan, in the wild-eyed form of a play of signifiers from which
psychoanalysis - in the rigour of its demands and in its form,
in the form Freud wanted - is dying just as certainly, nay even
more certainly, as from its institutional banalization .
The seduction of Lacanianism is, no doubt, an imposture;

5 8 SEDUCTION

but in its own way it corrects, rectifies and atones for the original imposture of Freud himself, that of the forclosure of the
form/seduction to the advantage of a would-be science. The
Lacanian discourse, which generalizes the seductive practices
of psychoanalysis, avenges this foreclosed seduction, but in a
manner that is'itself contaminated by psychoanalysis . That is
to say, the vengeance always occurs within the terms of the Law
(of the symbolic), resulting in an insidious seduction exercised
in terms of the law and (of the effigy) of a Master who rules
by the Word over hysterical masses unfit for pleasure. . .
Nonetheless, with Lacan it is still a matter of the death of psychoanalysis, of a death due to the triumphant but posthumous
reemergence of what at the beginning was denied . Isn't this
the fulfillment of a destiny? At least psychoanalysis will have
had the opportunity to end with a Great Impostor after having
begun .with a Great Denial .
That the most beautiful construction of meaning and interpretation ever erected thus collapses under the weight of its own
but have
signs, which were once terms '.heavy with meaning,
t
unrestrained
seduction,
terms
again
become
devices
in
an
once
and
that
is
both
complicit
with
in an untrammeled exchange
should
exalt
empty of meaning (including in the cure) - this
and comfort us. It is a sign that the truth at least (that for which
impostors reign) will be spared -us. And that what might appear
as psychoanalysis' failure is but the temptation common to every: great system of meaning, to sink into its own image and
lose its sense - which indeed suggests the return of primitive
seduction's- flame and the revenge of appearances . But then
where is the imposture? Having rejected the form/seduction
from the start, psychoanalysis -was perhaps only an illusion an illusion of truth and interpretation - that would be contradicted and counterbalanced by the Lacanian illusion of seduction .
Thus a cycle is completed, from which perhaps other interrogative and seductive forms will arise.
It was the same with God and the Revolution . To dispel all
appearances so that God's truth could shine forth was the illusion of the Iconoclasts. An illusion because God's truth did not
exist, and perhaps, secretly they knew it, this being why their
failure proceeded from the same intuition as that of the adorers
i
a

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

59

of images : one can live only the idea of altered truth. It is the
only way to live in conformity with the truth. Otherwise life
becomes unbearable (precisely because the truth does not exist) . One need not want to dispel appearances (the seduction
of images). But if one does, it is imperative that one not succeed lest the absence of the truth become manifest . Or the absence of God, or the Revolution. The Revolution, and in
particular its ape-like travesty, Stalinism, lives only by the idea
that everything is opposed to it. Stalinism is indestructible because it exists only in order to conceal the non-existence of
the Revolution and its truth, and thereby to restore hope. "The
people" Rivarol said, "did not want a Revolution, they wanted
only its spectacle" - because this is the only way to preserve
the Revolution's appeal, instead of abolishing it in its truth .
"We do not believe that the truth remains true once the veil
has been lifted" (Nietzsche).

TROMPE L'OEIL
OR ENCHANTED SIMULATION
Disenchanted simulation: pornography - truer than true the height of the simulacrum .
Enchanted simulation: the trompe-l'oeil - falser than false the secret of appearances.
Neither fable, story or composition, nor theater, scene or action. The trompe lbeil forgets all this and bypasses it by the
low-level representation of second-rate objects. The latter figure
in the great compositions of the time, but here they appear
alone, as though the discourse on painting had been eliminated. Suddenly they no longer "represent," they are no longer
objects, no longer anything. They are blank,,empty signs that
bespeak a social, religious or artistic anti-ceremony or antirepresentation. Scraps of social life, they turn against the latter
and parody its theatricality; this is why they are scattered, juxtaposed at random . The implication being that these objects are
not objects . They do not describe a familiar reality, as does a
still life. They describe a void, an absence, the absence of every representational hierarchy that organizes the elements of
a tableau, or for that matter, the political order. . .
These are not mere extras displaced from the main scene,
but ghosts that haunt the emptiness of the stage. Theirs is not
the aesthetic appeal of painting and resemblance, but the acute,
metaphysical appeal of the real's abolition. Haunted objects,

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 61

metaphysical objects, in their unreal reversion they are opposed
to the entire representative space of the Renaissance.
Their very insignificance is offensive. Objects without referents, stripped of their decor - old newspapers, books, nails,
boards, and scraps of food - isolated, decayed, spectral objects,
disincarnated from all narrative, they alone were able to trace
an obsession with a lost reality, something akin to life before
the subject and his acquisition of consciousness. "For the transparent, allusive image that the art lover expects, the trompe Z beil
tends to substitute the intractable opacity of Presence" (Pierre
Charpentrat) . Simulacra without perspective, the figures in
trompe l'oeil appear suddenly, with lustrous exactitude, as
though denuded of the aura of meaning and bathed in ether.
Pure appearances, they have the irony of too much reality.

There is no nature in the trompe l beil, nor landscapes, skies,
vanishing points or natural light. Nor faces, psychology or
historicity. Everything is artifact . A vertical backdrop raises objects isolated from their referential context to the status of pure
signs.
Translucency, suspense, fragility, obsolescence - hence the
insistence on paper (frayed at the edges), the letter, the mirror
or watch, the faded, untimely signs of a transcendence that has
vanished into the quotidian . The mirror of worn-out boards
whose knots and rings mark the time, like a clock without hands
that leaves one to guess the hour: these are things that have
lasted, in a time that has already passed . Anachrony alone stands
out, the involuted representation of time and space.
There are no fruits, meats or flowers, no baskets or bouquets,
nor any of the delightful things found in (a still) life. Nature is
carnal, and a still life is a carnal arrangement on a horizontal
plane, that provided by the ground or a table. Although a still
life may sometimes play with disorder, with the ragged edge
of things and the fragility of their use, it always retains the gravity
of real things, as underscored by the horizontalness . Whereas
the trompe l beil functions in weightlessness, as indicated by
the vertical backdrop, everything being suspended, the objects,

62

SEDUCTION

time, even light and perspective. While the still life uses classic
shapes and shades, the shadows borne by the trompe l beil lack
the depth that comes from a realluminous source . Like the obsolescence of objects, they are the sign of a slight vertigo, the
vertigo of a previous life, of an appearance prior to reality.
This mysterious light without origin, whose oblique rays are
no longer real, is like stagnant water, water without depth, soft
to the touch like a natural death . Here things have long since
lost their shadows (their substance) . Something other than the
sun shines on them, a brighter star, without an atmosphere, or
with an ether that doesn't refract. Perhaps death illuminates
these things directly, and that is their sole meaning? These
shadows do not move with the sun; they do not grow with the
evening; without movement, they appear as an inevitable edging. Not the result of chiaroscuro, nor a skilful dialectic of light
and shadow (for these are still painterly effects), they suggest
the transparency of objects to a black sun .
One senses that these objects are approaching the black hole
from which, for us, reality, the real world, and normal time
emerge. With this forward decentering effect, this advance
towards the subject of a mirror object, it is the appearance of
the double, in the guise of trivial objects, that creates the effect of seduction, the startling impression characteristic of the
trompe l beil : a tactile vertigo that recounts the subject's insane
desire to obliterate his own image, and thereby vanish . For reality
grips us only when we lose ourselves in it, or when it reappears as our own, hallucinated death .
A .vague physical wish to grasp things, but which having been
suspended, becomes metaphysical : the objects of the trompe
l oeil have something of the same: fantastic vivacity as the child's
discovery of his own image, an unmediated hallucination anterior to the perceptual order.
If there is a miracle of trompe l beil, it does not lie in the
realism of its execution, like the grapes of Zeuxis which appeared so real that birds came to peck at them . This is absurd .
Miracles never result from a surplus of reality but, on the contrary, from a sudden break in reality and the giddiness of feeling oneself fall. It is this loss of reality that the surreal familiarity
of objects translates . With the disintegration of this hierarchi-

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 6 3

cal organization of space that privileges the eye and vision, of
this perspectival simulation - for it is merely a simulacrum something emerges that, for want of something better, we express in terms of touch, a tactile hyperpresence of things, "as
though one could hold them:" But this tactile fantasy has nothing to do with our sense of touch; it is a metaphor for the "seizure" resulting from the annihilation of the scene and space
of representation . Suddenly this seizure rebounds onto the socalled "real" world, to reveal that this "reality" is naught but
a staged world, objectified in accord with the rules of perspective. "Reality" appears as a principle, one that defines the painting, sculpture and architecture of the period, but a principle
nonetheless - that is, a simulacrum which the experimental
hypersimulation of the trompe l beil) undermines.

The trompe l oeil does not seek to confuse itself with the
real . Consciously produced by means of play and artifice, it
presents itself as a simulacrum . By mimicking the third dimension, it questions the reality of this dimension, and by mimicking
and exceeding the effects of the real, it radically questions the
reality principle .
The real is relinquished by the very excess of its appearances .
The objects resemble themselves too much, this resemblance
being like a second state ; and by virtue of this allegorical resemblance, and of the diagonal lighting, they point to the irony of
too much reality.
Depth appears to have been turned inside out. While the
Renaissance organized all space in accord with a distant vanishing point, perspective in the trompe l beil is, in a sense, projected
forward . Instead of fleeing before the panoramic sweep of the
eye ( the privilege of panoptic vision), the objects "fool" the
eye ("trompent Z beil) by a sort of internal depth - not by causing one to believe in a world that does not exist, but by undermining the privileged position of the gaze. The eye, instead of
generating a space that spreads out, is but the internal vanishing point for a convergence of objects. A different universe occupies the foreground, a universe without horizon or

64

SEDUCTION

horizontality, like an opaque mirror placed before the eye, with
nothing behind it. This is, properly speaking, the realm of appearances, where there is nothing to see, where things see you .
They do not flee before your gaze, but position themselves in
front of you, with a light that seems to come from another
world, with shadows that never quite give them a true third
dimension. For this dimension, that of perspective, always indicates the bad conscience of the sign relative to reality - a bad
conscience that has eaten away at all painting since the
Renaissance.
Whence independent of the aesthetic pleasure, comes the
uncanniness of the trompe l'oeil - the strange light it casts on
this entirely new, western reality which emerged triumphant
with the Renaissance. The trompe Z beil is the ironic simulacrum
of that reality. It is what surrealism was to the functionalist revolution of the early twentieth century - surrealism being but an
ironic reverie on the principle of functionality. And like trompe
l oeil surrealism is not quite part of art or art history, for their
concern is with a metaphysical dimension, and not with matters of style. They attack our sense of reality or functionality
and, therefore, our sense of consciousness . They seek out the
wrong or reverse side of things, and undermine the world's apparent factuality. This is why the pleasure that they give us, their
seductiveness, however small, is radical; for it comes from a
radical surprise borne of appearances, from a life prior to the
mode of production of the real world.

The trompe l oeil is no longer confined to painting. Like stucco, its contemporary, it can do anything, mimic or parody anything. It has become the prototype for the malevolent use of
appearances. What began as a game took on fantastic dimensions in the XVIth century, and ended up eliminating the boundaries between painting, sculpture and architecture. In the murals
and ceiling paintings of the Renaissance and Baroque, painting
and sculpture converge . In the trompe Z'oeil murals and streets
of Los Angeles, architecture is deceived and defaced by illusion . The seduction of space by the signs of space. Having said

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

65

so much about the production of space, is it not time to speak
about its seduction?

And about the seduction of political space. For example. the
studiolos of the Duke of Urbino and Federigo da Montefeltre
in the ducal palace of Urbino and Gubbio: tiny sanctuaries entirely in trompe Z'oeil at the heart of the immense space of the
palace. The latter exemplifies the triumph of an architectural
perspective, of a space deployed according to the rules, while
the studiolo appears as an inverted microcosm. Cut off from
the rest of the structure, without windows, literally without
space - here space is, actualized by simulation . If the palace
as a whole constitutes the architectural act par excellence, the
manifest discourse of art (and power), then what is one to make
of the miniscule studiolo that adjoins the chapel like yet another
sacred place, but with an air of bewitchment? It is not clear
what is happening with regard to space, and consequently, to
the entire system of representations that gives order to the palace
and republic .
It is a privatissime space, the prerogative of the Prince, like
incest and transgression were once kingly prerogatives . A complete reversal of the rules of the game is in effect here, allowing us to surmise ironically, by the allegory of the trompe Z'oeil,
that the external space, that of the palace, and beyond it, the
city, that is, the political space, the locus of power, is itself
perhaps only an effect of perspective. Such a dangerous secret,
such a radical hypothesis, the Prince must keep to himself in
the strictest secrecy : for it is the very secret of his power.
Since Machiavelli politicians have perhaps always known that
the mastery of a simulated space is at the source of their power, that politics is not a real activity, but a simulation model,
whose manifest acts are but actualized impressions. It is this
blind spot within the palace, cut off from architecture and public
life, which in a sense reigns supreme, not by direct determination, but by a sort of internal reversion, by an abrogation of
the rules enacted in secret, as in primitive rituals. A hole in reality, an ironic transfiguration, an exact simulacrum hidden at the

66 SEDUCTION

heart of reality, and on which the latter depends for its functioning. This is the secret of appearances .
Thus the Pope, the Grand Inquisitor, the greatJesuits and theologians all knew that God did not exist; this was their secret,
and the secret of their strength . Similarly Montefeltre's studiolo in trompe l'oeil secretly suggests that, in the last instance,
reality does not exist, that "real" in-depth space, including political space, is always potentially reversible - the secret that
once commanded politics, but which have since been lost in
the illusion of the masses' "reality."

I'LL BE YOUR MIRROR
In the trompe Z oeil, whether a mirror or painting, we are
bewitched by the spell of the missing dimension . It is the latter that establishes the space of seduction and becomes a source
of vertigo. For if the divine mission of all things is to find their
meaning, or to find a structure on which to base their meaning, they also seek, by virtue of a diabolical nostalgia, to lose
themselves in appearances, in the seduction of their image. That
it to say, they seek to unite what should be separated into a single effect of death and seduction . Narcissus.
Seduction cannot possibly be represented, because in seduction the distance between the real and its double, and the distortion between the Same and the Other, is abolished. Bending
over a pool of water, Narcissus quenches his thirst . His image
is no longer "other ;" it is a surface that absorbs and seduces
him, which he can approach but never pass beyond. For there
is no beyond, just as there is no reflexive distance between him
and his image. The mirror of water is not a surface of reflection, but of absorption .
This is why of all the great figures of seduction in mythology and art - who seduce by a look, a song, an absence, by rouge,
beauty or monstrosity, by masks or madness, by their fame, but
also their failure and death - Narcissus stands out with singular force.

68 SEDUCTION

Not a mirror-reflection, in which the subject finds himself
transformed - not a mirror phase, in which the subject establishes himselfwithin the imaginary. All .this belongs to the psychological domain of alterity and identity, not seduction.
All reflection theory is impoverished, particularly the idea
that seduction is rooted in the attraction of like to like, in a mimetic exaltation of one's own image, or an ideal mirage of resemblance . Thus Vincent Descombes, in L'Inconscient malgre lui,
writes :
What seduces is not some feminine wile, but the
fact that it is directed at you. It is seductive to be
seduced, and consequently, it is being seduced that
is seductive. In other words, the being seduced
finds himself in the person seducing. What the person seduced sees in the one who seduces him, the
unique object of his fascination, is his own seductive, charming self, his lovable self-image.. .
It is always a matter of self-seduction and its psychological
vicissitudes . In the narcissistic myth, however, the mirror does
not exist so that Narcissus can find within himself some living
ideal. It is a matter of the mirror as an absence of depth, as a
superficial abyss, which others find seductive and vertiginous
only because they are each the first to be swallowed up in it.
All seduction in this sense is narcissistic, and its secret lies
with this mortal absorption . Thus women, being closer to this
other, hidden mirror (with which they shroud their image and
body) are also closer to the effects of seduction. Men, by contrast, have depth, but no secrets; hence their power and fragility.
If seduction does not proceed from some ideal mirage of the
subject, nor does it result from the mirror ideal of death. In
Pausanias' version :
Narkissos had a twin sister, they were exactly the
same to look at with just the same hairstyle and
the same clothes, and they even used to go hunting together. Narkissos was in love with his sister,
and when she died he used to visit the spring ; he

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

69

knew that what he saw was his own reflection, but
even so he found some relief in telling himself it
was his sister's image.
Guide to Greece. Vol . I, p. 376

According to H.-P Jeudy, who accepts this version, Narcissus seduces himself, and conquers his power of seduction, only
by embracing mimetically the lost image, restored by his own
face, of his deceased twin sister.
But is a mimetic relation with the image of the deceased really
necessary to investigate narcissistic vertigo? In truth, the latter
has no need of a twin refraction . Its own illusion will do - which
is perhaps the illusion of its own death . Perhaps death is always incestuous - a fact that would only add to its spell. The
"soul sister" is its spiritualized version. The great stories of seduction, that of Phaedra or Isolde, are stories of incest, and always
end in death. What are we to conclude, if not that death itself
awaits us in the age-old temptation of incest, including in the
incestuous relation we maintain with our own image? We are
seduced by the latter because it consoles us with the imminent
death of our sacrilegous existence. Our mortal self-absorption
with our image consoles us for the irreversibility of our having
been born and having to reproduce. It is by this sensual, incestuous transaction with our image, our double, and our death,
that we gain our power of seduction .

"I'll be your mirror" does not signify "' I'll be your reflec-

tion" but "I'll be your deception."

To seduce is to die as reality and reconstitute oneself as illusion . It is to be taken in by one's own illusion and move in

an enchanted world . It is the power of the seductive woman
who takes herself for her own desire, and delights in the selfdeception in which others, in their turn, will be caught . Narcissus too loses himself in his own illusory image ; that is why
he turns from his truth, and by his example turns others from
their truth - and so becomes a model of love.
The strategy of seduction is one of deception . It lies in wait

70 SEDUCTION

for all that tends to confuse itself with its reality. And it is potentially a source of fabulous strength . For if production can only
produce objects or real signs, and thereby obtain some power;
seduction, by producing only illusions, obtains all powers, including the power to return production and reality to their fundamental illusion .
It even lies in wait for the unconscious and desire, by turning them into a mirror of the unconscious and desire. For the
latter concerns only drives and their gratification; while the enchantment begins only after one has been taken in by one's
desire. It is the illusion that, happily, saves us from "psychic
reality." And it is the illusion of psychoanalysis, which confuses
itself with its own desire for psychoanalysis and thereby enters
into seduction, into auto-seduction, refracting the latter's power
for its own ends .
Thus all science, reality, and production only'postpone the
due date of seduction, which shines as non-sense, as the sensual and intelligible form of non-sense, in the sky of their desire.
The deception's raison d etre. Like the hawk that
returns to a piece of red leather in the form of a
bird, is it not the same illusion that, within repetition, confers an absolute reality onto the, object
that wins? Beyond all question of belief, Warranted or unwarranted, the deception is, in a sense,
recognition of the endless power ofseduction . Narcissus, having lost his twin sister, mourns her loss,
by constituting his own face into an illusory attraction . Neither conscious nor unconscious, the
dupery is fully played out and sufficient unto itself.
H .I? Jeudy
The deception can be inscribed in the sky; its power will not
be diminished . Every sign of the Zodiac has its form of seduction . For we all seek the favour of a meaningless fate, and place
our hopes in the spell that might result from some absolutely
irrational conjuncture - here lies the strength of. of the horoscope and zodiacal signs . No one should laugh at :astrology, for
he who no longer seeks to seduce the stars is the sadder for
i

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 7 1

it. In effect, many a person's misfortune comes from their not
having a place in the sky, within a field of signs that would agree
with them - that is to say, in the last instance, from their not
having been seduced by their birth and its constellation . They
will bear this fate for life, and their very death will come at the
wrong time . To fail to be seduced by one's sign is far more serious than the failure to have one's merits rewarded or one's desire
gratified. Symbolic discredit is always much more serious than
a real defect or misfortune.
Thus the charitable idea of founding an Institute of Zodiacal
Semiurgy where, just as one's physical appearance can be corrected by plastic surgery, the injustices of the Sign could be righted and the horoscope's orphans finally receive the Sign of their
choice in order that they might be reconciled with themselves .
It would be a great success, at least the equal of that of the suicide motels where people will come to die in the manner of
their choosing .

DEATH IN SAMARKAND
An ellipsis of the sign, an eclipse of meaning: an, illusion. The
mortal distraction that a single sign can cause instantaneously.
Consider the story of the soldier who meets Death at a crossing in the marketplace, and believes he saw him make a menacing gesture in his direction. He rushes to the king's palace and
asks the king for his best horse in order that he might flee during the night far from Death, as far as Samarkand. Upon which
the king summons Death to the palace and reproaches him for
having frightened one of his best servants. ; But Death,
astonished, replies: "I didn't mean to frighten him . It was just
that I was surprised to see this soldier here, when we had a
rendez-vous tomorrow in Samarkand. "
Yes, one runs towards one's fate all the more surely by seeking to escape it . Yes, everyone seeks his own death, and the
failed acts are the most successful . Yes, signs follow an unconscious course. But all this concerns the truth of the rendez-vous
in Samarkand; it does not account for the seduction of the story, which is in no way an apologue of truth.
What is astounding about the story is that this seemingly inevitable rendez-vous need not have taken place. There is nothing to suggest that the soldier would have been in Samarkand
without this chance encounter, and without the ill-luck of

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 73

Death's naive gesture, which acted in spite of itself as a gesture
of seduction. Had Death been content to call the soldier back
to order, the story would lose its charm. Everything here is
hinged on a single, involuntary sign. The gesture does not appear to be part of a strategy, nor even an unconscious ruse; yet
it takes on the unexpected depth of seduction, that is, it appears as something that moves laterally, as a sign that, unbeknownst to the protagonists (including Death, as well as the
soldier), advances a deadly command, an aleatory sign behind
which another conjunction, marvelous or disastrous, is being
enacted. A conjunction that gives the sign's trajectory all the
characteristics of a witticism .
No one in the story has anything to reproach himself with
- or else the king who lent his horse, is as guilty as anyone else.
No. Behind the apparent liberty of the two central characters
(Death was free to make his gesture, the soldier to flee), they
were both following a rule of which neither were aware. The
rule of this game, which, like every fundamental rule, must remain secret, is that death is not a brute event, but only occurs
through seduction, that is, by way of an instantaneous, indecipherable complicity, by a sign or signs that will not be
deciphered in time .
Death is a rendez-vous, not an objective destiny. Death cannot fail to go since he is this rendez-vous, that is, the allusive
conjunction of signs and rules which make up the-game. At the
same time, Death is an innocent player in the game . This is what
gives the story its secret irony, whose resolution appears as a
stroke of wit [trait d esprit], and provides us with such sublime pleasure - and distinguishes it from a moral fable or a vulgar tale about the death instinct . The spiritual character [trait
spirituel] of the story extends the spirited character [trait
d espritgestuel] of Death's gesture, and the two seductions, that
of Death and of the story, fuse together.
Death's astonishment is delightful, an astonishment at the frivolity of an arrangement where things proceed by chance : "But
this soldier should have known that he was expected in Samarkand tomorrow, and taken his time to get there. . ." However
Death shows only surprise, as if his existence did not depend
as much as the soldier's on the fact that they were to meet in

74 SEDUCTION

Samarkand. Death lets things happen, and it is his casualness
that makes him appealing - this is why the soldier hastens to
join him.
None of this involves the unconscious, metaphysics or psychology. Or even strategy. Death has no plan. He restores chance
with a chance gesture; this is hove he works, yet everything still
gets done . There is nothing that cannot not be done, yet everything still preserves the lightness of chance, of a furtive gesture,
an accidental encounter or an illegible sign . That's how it is with
seduction. . .
Moreover, the soldier went to meet death because he gave
meaning to a meaningless gesture which did not even concern
him. He took personally something that was notj addressed to
him, as one might mistake for oneself a smile meant for someone else. The height of seduction is to be without seduction.
The man seduced is caught in spite of himself in a web of stray
signs .
And it is because the sign has been turned from its meaning
or "seduced," that the story itself is seductive. It is when signs
are seduced that they become seductive.

Only signs ,without referents, empty, senseless, absurd and
elliptical signs, absorb us .
A little boy asks a fairy to grant him his wishes . The fairy
agrees on one condition, that he never think of the colour red
in the fox's tail . "Is that all?" he replies offhandedly. And off
he goes to find happiness. But what happens? He is unable to
rid himself of this fox's tail, which he believed .he had already
forgotten. He sees it everywhere, with its red colour, in his
thoughts, and in his dreams. Despite all his efforts, he cannot
make it disappear. He becomes obsessed with this absurd, insignificant, but tenacious image, augmented by all the spite that .
comes from not having been able to rid himself of it. Not only
do the fairy's promises not come true, but he loses his taste for
life . Perhaps he dies without ever having gotten clear of it.
An absurd story, but absolutely plausible, for it demonstrates
the power of the insignificant signifier, the power of a meaning-

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

75

less signifier.
The fairy was mischievous (she wasn't a good fairy) . She knew
that the mind is irresistibly attracted to a place devoid of meaning. Here the emptiness was seemingly provoked by the insignificance (this is why the child was not on his guard) of the
colour red of a fox's tail. Elsewhere words and gestures are emptied of their meaning by unflagging repetition and scansion .
To wear meaning out, to tire it out in order to liberate the pure
seduction of the null signifier or empty term - such is the
strength of ritual magic and incantation.
But it can just as well be a direct fascination with the void,
as in the physical vertigo of a chasm, or the metaphorical vertigo of a door that opens onto the void . If you were to see written on a door panel: "This opens onto the void ." - wouldn't
you still want to open it?
That which looks onto nothing has every reason to be
opened. That which doesn't say anything has every reason to
never be forgotten. That which is arbitrary is simultaneously
endowed with a total necessity. The predestination of the empty
sign, the precession of the void, the vertigo of an obligation
devoid of sense, a passion for necessity.
Here lies something of the secret of magic (the fairy was a
magician). The power of words, their "symbolic efficacy" is
greater when uttered in a void . When they have neither context nor referent, they can take on the power of a self-fulfilling
(or self-defeating) prophecy. Like the colour red of a fox's tail.
Unreal and insubstantial, it proves compelling because of its
nullity. If the fairy had forbidden the child from doing something serious or significant, he would have pulled through easily, instead of being seduced against his will. For it is not the
prohibition, but its non-sense that seduces him . Thus, against
all logic, it is the improbable prophecies that come true ; all that
is required is that they not make too much sense. Otherwise
they would not be prophecies. Such is the bewitchment of magical speech, such is the sorcery of seduction.
This is why neither magic nor seduction concerns belief or
make-believe, for they employ signs without credibility and
gestures without referents; their logic is not one of mediation,
but of immediacy, whatever the sign.

76

SEDUCTION

Proof is unnecessary. Everybody knows that their spell is carried by the unmediated resonance of the signs. There is no official, intermediary time for the sign and its decipherment ; it is
not a matter of believing, doing, wanting, or knowing. Their
attraction is foreign to the forms of discourse, as well as the
distinctive logic of the utterance: and statement. Their spell belongs to the order of declamation and prophecy, a discourse
whose symbolic effectiveness requires neither decipherment
nor belief .

The immediate attraction of a song, a voice or scent. The
attraction of the panther's scent (Ddtienne: Dionysos mis a
mort). According to the ancients, the panther is the only animal
to emit a fragrant odour, which. it uses to capture its victims.
The panther has only to hide (his appearance strikes terror),
and his victims are bewitched by his scent - an invisible trap
to which they come to be caught . But this power of seduction
can be turned against the panther: one hunts him by using
spices, herbs and perfumes as bait.
But what does it mean to say that the panther seduces by
its scent? Why is its scent seductive? (And why is this legend
itself seductive? What sort of fragrance does it emit?) What accounts for the seduction of the song of the Sirens, the beauty
of a face, the depths of a chasm, or the imminence of a catastrophe - as well as the scent of the panther or a door that opens
onto the void? Is it some hidden force of attraction? or a powerful desire? No, these are empty terms . Seduction lies with the
annulment of the signs, of their meaning, with their pure appearance . Eyes that seduce have no meaning, their meaning being exhausted in the gaze, as a face with makeup is exhausted
in its appearance, in the formal. rigour of a senseless labour.

Above all, seduction supposes not a signified desire, but the
beauty of an artifice .

The panther's scent is also a senseless message - and behind
this message the panther is invisible, like a woman beneath her
makeup. The Sirens too remained unseen. Sorcery is formed
by what lies hidden.

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 77

The seduction of eyes. The most immediate, purest form of
seduction, one that bypasses words. Where looks alone join
in a sort of duel, an immediate intertwining, unbeknownst to
others and their discourses : the discrete charm of a silent and
immobile orgasm . Once the delightful tension of the gazes gives
way to words or loving gestures, the intensity declines. A tactility of gazes that sums up the body's full potential (and that
of its desires?) in a single, subtle instant, as in a stroke of wit.
A duel that is simultaneouly sensual, even voluptuous, but disincarnated - a perfect foretaste of seduction's vertigo, which
the more carnal pleasures that follow will not equal. That these
eyes meet is accidental, but it is as though they had been fixed
on each other forever. Devoid of meaning, what is exchanged
are not the gazes. There is no desire here, for desire is not captivating, while eyes, like fortuitous appearances, cast a spell composed of pure, duel signs, with neither depth nor temporality.

Any system that is totally complicit in its own absorption,
such that signs no longer make sense, will exercise a remarkable power of fascination . Systems fascinate by their esotericism,
which preserves them from external logics . The absorption of
anything real by something self-sufficient, and self-destructive,
proves fascinating. Whether a system of thought, an automatic
mechanism, a perfect and perfectly useless object or a desert
of stones, a woman or strip-tease artist (who must caress herself in order to "enchant" and exercise her power) - or, to be
sure, God that most beautiful piece of esoteric machinery.
Or the woman with makeup, who is absent to herself, an absence of a focussed look, the absence of a face - how can one
not be swallowed up in it? A beauty is one who abolishes herself, thereby constituting a challenge that we can only take up
by the dazzling loss of what? Of what is not beautiful. The beautiful woman absorbed by the cares that her beauty demands
is immediately infectious because, in her narcissistic excess, she
is removed from her self, and because all that is removed from
the self is plunged into secrecy and absorbs its surroundings .
The attraction of the void lies at the basis of seduction: not

78 SEDUCTION

the accumulation of signs, nor the messages of desire, but an
esoteric complicity with the absorption of signs. ;Seduction begins in secrecy, in the slow, brutal exhaustion of meaning which
establishes a complicity amongst the signs ; it is here, more than
in a'physical being or the, quality of a desire, that seduction is
concocted . And it is what accounts for the enchantment of the
games's rules.

THE SECRET AND THE CHALLENGE
The secret .
The seductive, initiatory quality of that which cannot be said
because it makes no sense, and of that which is not said even
though it gets around. Thus I know another's secret but do not
reveal it and he knows that I know, but does not acknowledge
it: the intensity between us is simply this secret about the secret .
The complicity has nothing to do with some hidden piece of
information. Besides, even if we wanted to reveal the secret we
could not, since there is nothing to say .. Everything that can
be revealed lies outside the secret . For the latter is not a hidden signified, nor the key to something, but circulates through
and traverses everything that can be said, just as seduction flows
beneath the obscenity of speech . It is the opposite of communication, and yet it can be shared. The secret maintains its power
only at the price of remaining unspoken, just as seduction operates only because never spoken nor intended.
The hidden or the repressed has a tendency to manifest itself, whereas the secret does not. It is an initiatory and implosive form: one enters into a secret, but cannot exit. The secret
is never revealed, never communicated, never even "secreted"
(Zempleny, Nouvelle Revue de Psychanalyse, no. 14). Whence
its strength, the power of an allusive, ritual exchange.

80 SEDUCTION

Thus in Kierkegaard's Diary cf the Seducer, seduction takes
the form of an enigma to be solved . The girl is an enigma, and
in order to seduce her, one must become an enigma for her.
It is an enigmatic duel, one that the seduction solves, but
without disclosing the secret . If the secret were disclosed, sexuality would stand revealed . The story's true meaning, if it had
one, would be about sex - but in fact it doesn't have one. In
that place where meaning should be, where sex should occur,
where words point to it, and where others think i't to be - there
is nothing. And this nothing/secret, this, the seduction's unsignified moves beneath the words and their meaning, and
moves faster than their meaning. It is what touches you first,
before the sentences arrive, in the time it takes for them to fade
away. A seduction beneath discourse, an invisible seduction,
moving from sign to sign - a secret circulation;
It is the exact opposite of the psychological relation : to share
someone's secrets is not to share his or her phantasies or desires,
nor it is to share something as yet unspoken . When' the id speaks,
it is not seductive. All that involves repression, expressive energies or the unconscious, everything that wishes to speak, everywhere the ego has to appear -all this belongs to an exoteric
order that contradicts the esoteric form of : secrecy and
seduction.
Yet the unconscious, the "adventure" of the unconscious, appears as the last, large-scale attempt to reestablish secrecy in
a society without secrets. The unconscious appears as our secret,
our personal mystery in a confessional and transparent society. But it isn't really a secret, for it is merely psychological . It
does not have an existence of its own, since the unconscious
was created at the same time as psychoanalysis, ; that is to say,
at the same time as the procedures for its assimilation, and the
techniques for the retraction of the secrets lodged in its deep
structures .
But perhaps something is taking its revenge on all the interpretations, and in a subtle way disrupting their development? Something that, most decidedly, does not want to be said and that,
being an enigma, enigmatically possesses its own resolution,
and so aspires to remain in secret and in the joys of secrecy.
Language returns to its secret seduction despite all the efforts
r

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 81

to uncover and betray it in order to make it signify, while we
return to our own insoluble pleasures.

There is neither a time of seduction, nor a time for seduction, but still it has its own indispensable rhythm. Unlike instrumental strategies, which proceed by intermediary stages,
seduction operates instantaneously, in a single movement, and
is always its own end.
The cycle of seduction cannot be stopped. One can .seduce
someone in order to seduce someone else, but also seduce
someone else to please oneself. The illusion that leads from the
one to the other is subtle . Is it to seduce, or to be seduced, that
is seductive? But to be seduced is the best way to seduce. It
is an endless refrain. There is no active or passive mode in seduction, no subject or object, no interior or exterior : seduction
plays on both sides, and there is no frontier separating them .
One cannot seduce others, if one has not oneself been seduced.
Because seduction never stops at the truth of signs, but operates by deception and secrecy, it inaugurates a mode of circulation that is itself secretive and ritualistic, a sort of immediate
initiation that plays by its own rules .
To be seduced is to be turned from one's truth. To seduce
is to lead the other from his/her truth . This truth then becomes
a secret that escapes him/her (Vincent Descombes: L'inconscient
malgre lua) .
Seduction is immediately reversible, and its reversibility is constituted by the challenge it implies and the secret in which it
is absorbed .
It is a power of attraction and distraction, of absorption and
fascination, a power that cause the collapse of not just sex, but
the real in general - a power of defiance. It is never an economy of sex or speech, but an escalation of violence and grace,
an instantaneous passion that can result in sex, but which can
just as easily exhaust itself in the process of defiance and death .
It implies a radical indetermination that distinguishes it from
a drive - drives being indeterminate in relation to their object,
but determined as force and origin, while the passion of seduc-

82

SEDUCTION

tion has neither substance nor origin . It is not from some libidinal investment, some energy of desire that this passion acquires
its intensity, but from gaming as pure form and from purely formal bluffing.

Likewise, the challenge. It too has a duel form that wears itself out in no time at all, drawing its intensity from this instantaneous reversion. It too is bewitching, like a meaningless
discourse to which one cannot not respond for, the very reason that it is absurd. Why does one respond to a challenge?
The same mysterious question as : what is it that seduces?
What could be more seductive than a challenge? A seduction or challenge always drives the other mad, but with a vertigo that is reciprocal - an insanity borne by the vertiginous
absence that unites them, and by their reciprocal engulfment .
Such is the inevitability of the challenge, and why one cannot
but respond to it. For it inaugurates a kind of insane relation,
quite unlike relations of communication or exchange : a duel
relation transacted by meaningless signs, but held together by
a fundamental rule and its secret observance. A challenge terminates all contracts and exchanges regulated by the law
(whether the law of nature or value), substituting a highly conventional and ritualized pact, with an unceasing obligation to
respond and respond in spades - an obligation that is governed
by a fundamental game rule, and proceeds in accord with its
own rhythm . In contrast to the :law, which is always inscribed
in stone or the sky, or in one's heart, this fundamental rule never
needs to be stated ; indeed, it must never be stated . It is immediate, immanent, and inevitable (whereas the law is transcendent and explicit).
There can never be seduction or challenge by contract . In
order for a challenge or seduction to exist, all contractual relations must disappear before the duel relation - a :relation composed of secret signs that have been withdrawn from exchange,
and derive their intensity from their formal division and immediate reverberation . In like manner, seduction's enchantment
puts an end to all libidinal economies, and every sexual or psy-

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 83

chological contract, replacing them with a dizzying spiral of
responses and counter-responses . It is never an investment but
a risk ; never a contract but a pact; never individual but duel ;
never psychological but ritual ; never natural but artificial . It is
no one's strategy, but a destiny.

Challenge and seduction are quite similar. And yet there is
a difference . In a challenge one draws the other into one's area
of strength, which, in view of the potential for unlimited escalation, is also his or her area of strength. Whereas in a strategy
(?) of seduction one draws the other into one's area of weakness, which is also his or her area of weakness . A calculated
weakness, an incalculable weakness : one challenges the other
to be taken in. A weakness or failure : isn't the panther's scent
itself a weakness, an abyss which the other animals approach
giddily? In fact, the panther of the mythical scent is simply the
epicenter of death, and from this weakness subtle fragrances
emerge.
To seduce is to appear weak. To seduce is to render weak .
We seduce with our weakness, never with strong signs or powers. In seduction we enact this weakness, and this is what gives
seduction its strength .
We seduce with our death, our vulnerability, and with the
void that haunts us. The secret is to know how to play with
death in the absence of a gaze or gesture, in the absence of
knowledge or meaning.
Psychoanalysis tells us to assume our fragility and passivity,
but in almost religious terms, turns them into a form of resignation and acceptance in order to promote a well tempered psychic equilibrium. Seduction, by contrast, plays triumphantly
with weakness, making a game of it, with its own rules.

Everything is seduction and nothing but seduction.
They wanted us to believe that everything was production .
The theme song of world transformation : the play of produc-

84 SEDUCTION

tive forces is what regulates the course of things. Seduction is
merely an immoral, frivolous, superficial, and superfluous
process, limited to the realm of signs and appearances, devoted to pleasure and the usufruct of useless bodies . But what if
everything, contrary to appearances - in fact, in accord with
a secret rule of appearances - operates by seduction?
the
the
the
the
the
the

moment of seduction
suspension of seduction
risk of seduction
accident of seduction
delirium of seduction
pause of seduction.

Production only accumulates, without deviating from its end.
It replaces all illusions with just one, its own, which becomes
the reality principle. Production, like revolution, puts an end
to the epidemic of appearances. But seduction is inevitable. No
one living escapes it - not even the dead . For the'dead are only
dead when there are no longer any echoes from this world to
seduce them, and no longer any rites challenging them to exist.
For us, only those who can no longer produce are dead. In
reality, only those who do not wish to seduce or be seduced
are dead. But seduction gets hold of them nonetheless, just as
it gets hold of all production and ends up destroying it .
For the void - the hole that, at any point, is burned out by
the return of the flame of any sign, the meaninglessness that
makes for seduction's unexpected charm - also lies in wait,
without illusion, for production once the latter has reached its
limits. Everything returns to the void, including our words and
gestures. But before disappearing, certain words, and gestures,
by anticipating their demise, are able to exercise a seduction
that the others will never know Seduction's secret lies in this
evocation and revocation of the other, with a slowness and suspense that are poetic, like the slow motion film of a fall or an
explosion, because something had the time, prior to its completion, to makes its absence felt. And this, if there is such a
thing, is the perfection of "desire."

THE EFFIGY OF THE SEDUCTRESS
The prismatic effect of seduction provides another space of
refraction . Seduction does not consist of a simple appearance,
nor a pure absence, but the eclipse of a presence . Its sole strategy
is to be-there/not-there, and thereby produce a sort of flickering, a hypnotic mechanism that crystallizes attention outside
all concern with meaning. Absence here seduces presence .
The sovereign power of the seductress stems from her ability to "eclipse" any will or context . She cannot allow other relations to be established - even the most intimate, affectionate,
amorous or sexual (particularly not the latter) - without breaking
them, or repaying them with a strange fascination. She constantly avoids all relations in which, at some given moment, the
question of truth will be posed . She undoes them effortlessly,
not by denying or destroying them, but by making them shimmer. Here lies her secret : in the flickering of a presence. She
is never where one expects her, and never where one wants
her. Seduction supposes, Virilio would say, an "aesthetics of disappearance ."
The seductress turns desire itself into an illusion or trap. For
her there is no more truth to desire - or to the body - than
to anything else. Love itself, or the .sex act, can become moments in a seduction if given the ecliptic form of appearance /dis-

86 SEDUCTION

appearance, that it to say, a discontinuous form that cuts short
every emotion, pleasure and relation in order to reaffirm the
superior character of seduction, its transcendent aesthetics relative to the immanent ethics of :pleasure and desire . Love and
the carnal act are only so much seductive finery, the most refined and subtle invented by women to seduce men. But
modesty and rejection can play the same role. ;Everything is
finery in this sense, and belongs to the genius of appearance .
"I do not want to love, cherish, or even please you, but to
seduce you - and my only concern is not that you; love or please
me, but that you are seduced." The game of the seductress involves a certain mental cruelty, towards herself as well as others .
Any affection on her part is a weakness relative to the ritual
imperative. No quarter can be given in a challenge where love
and desire are dissolved. Nor any respite, lest this fascination
be reduced to nothing. The true seductress can only exist in
a state of seduction. Outside this state, she is no longer a woman, neither an object nor subject of desire, faceless and unattractive - for she is borne by an all-consuming passion .
Seduction is sovereign - the only ritual that eclipses all others
- but its sovereignty is cruel, and carries a heavy price.
Thus, when seducing, her body and desires are no longer
her own . But then what is this body, or these desires? She
doesn't believe in them - and so plays with them. Without a
body of her own, she turns herself into a pure appearance, an
artificial construct with which to trap the desires of others .
Seduction consists in letting the other believe himself to be the
subject of his desire, without oneself being caught in this trap.
It can also consist in becoming a.. "seductive" sex"object, if that
is the man's "desire." The spell cast by seduction passes through
sexual attraction; but indeed, it passes through in' order to transcend it. "I am attractive, but you are captivating." - "Life has
its attractions, but death leaves one spellbound ."
For seduction, desire is not an end but a hypothetical prize.
More precisely, the objective is to provoke and deceive desire,
which exists only to burn for a moment and then be disappointed -, it being deluded as to its power, which is given to it only
in order to be withdrawn. The person might not even know
what has happened . It might be that the person seducing actu-

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

87

ally loves or desires the person seduced, but at a deeper level
(or a more superficial level if one will, in the superficial abyss
of appearances) another game is being played out, unbeknownst
to the two protagonists who remain mere puppets.
For seduction, desire is a myth. If desire is a will to power
and possession, seduction places before it an equal will to power
by the simulacrum. In forming a web of appearances seduction both sustains this hypothetical power of desire and exorcizes it. Just as for Kierkegaard's seducer the girl's naive grace,
her spontaneous erotic power is merely a myth, which is sustained only so that it can be annihilated (perhaps he loves her,
but in the suprasensual realm of seduction the girl is but the
mythical figure of a sacrifice) ; similarly, for the seductress, the
power of man's desire is a myth that she uses in order to both
evoke and destroy it. The seducer's artifice, directed at the girl's
mythical grace, is fully equal to the seductress' artificial reworking of her body, which is directed at the man's mythical desire.
In both cases the mythical power, whether the power of grace
or desire, is to be reduced to nothing. Seduction always seeks
to overturn and exorcize a power. If seduction is artifical, it is
also sacrificial. One is playing with death, it always being a matter of capturing or immolating the desire of the other.
Seduction, by contrast, is immortal . The seductress, like the
hysteric, wants to be immortal and live in an eternal present
- much to everyone's astonishment, given the field of deception and despair in which she moves, and given the cruelty of
her game. But here she survives because outside psychology,
meaning or desire . What destroys people, wears them down,
is the meaning they give their acts. But the seductress does not
attach any meaning to what she does, nor suffer the weight of
desire . Even if she speaks of reasons or motives, be they guilty
or cynical, it is a trap. And her ultimate trap is to ask: "Tell me
who I am" - when she is indifferent to what she is, when she
is a blank, with neither age nor history. Her power lies in the
irony and elusiveness of her presence. She may be blind to her
own existence, but she is well aware of all the mechanisms of
reason and truth people use to protect themselves from seduction ; and she is aware that from behind the shelter of these
mechanisms they will nonetheless, ifhandled correctly, let them-

88

SEDUCTION

selves be seduced.
"I am immortal," in other words, relentless. Which is to say
that the game must never stop, this even being one of its fundamental rules. For just as no player can be greater than the
game itself, so no seductress can be greater than seduction. None
of the vicissitudes of love or desire can be allowed to break
this rule. One must love in order to seduce, and not the reverse.
Seduction consists of finery, it weaves and unweaves appearances, as Penelope weaved and unweaved her tapestry, as desire
itself was woven and unwoven beneath her hands. For it is appearances, and the mastery of appearances, that rule.
No one has ever been dispossessed of the power associated
with seduction and its rules, this fundamental form . Yes, women have been dispossessed of their bodies, their desires, happiness and rights . But they have always remained mistresses of
this possibility of eclipse, of seductive disappearance and transluscence, and so have always been capable of eclipsing the power of their masters.

But is there a feminine figure, of seduction or, for that matter, a masculine figure? Or is there but one form, variants of
which crystallize around one or the other sex?
Seduction oscillates between two poles, a pole of strategy
and a pole of animality (and thus ranges from the most subtle
calculation to the most brutal physical suggestion) which we
associate with the figures of the seducer and the seductress
respectively. But doesn't this division mask a single form, an
undivided seduction?

Animal seduction.
With animals seduction achieves its purest form, in that the
seductive display appears instinctual, immediately given in reflex
behaviours and natural finery. But for all that, animal seduction does not cease to be perfectly ritualistic. In this sense,
animals are the least natural of beings, for with them artifice

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

89

the effects of mascarade and finery - is at its most naive. It
is at the heart of this paradox, where the distinction between
nature and culture is suppressed in the concept offinery, that
the analogy between animality and femininity plays itself out.
If animals are seductive, is it not because they are strategic
elements in a campaign to deride our pretensions to humanity? If the feminine is seductive, is it not because it too thwarts
our claims to depth? The frivolous has a power of seduction
which concurs with that of the bestial.
What we find seductive in animals is not their "natural"
savagery. For that matter, are animals really characterized by
savagery, by a high degree of contingency, unpredictability, or
impulsiveness, or on the contrary by high degrees of ritualized
behaviour? The same question can be posed for primitive societies. The latter were once seen as close to the animal realm,
and indeed, in a sense, they are: for they share a common disregard for the law, tied to high levels of observance of fixed
forms, whether in their relation to their territory, other animals
or men.
Even in their dances and bodily ornamentation, their animal
grace is a product of a series of observances, rules and analogies, which makes it the opposite of natural chance. All the prestigious attributes associated with animals are ritual traits . The
"natural" finery of animals is similar to the artificial finery of
humans, who, one might add, have always sought to incorporate
the former into their rites. If there is a preference for animal
masks, it is because animals immediately appear as ritual masks,
as a play of signs and a strategy of finery - as is the case with
human rituals. The very morphology of primitive rituals, their
furs and feathers, gestures and dances are a prototype of ritual
efficacy. That is, they never form a functional system (reproduction, sexuality, ecology, mimicry - the postulates of an extremely
impoverished ethology reworked and corrected by functionalism), but an ostentatious ceremony for mastering signs, and
a cycle for seducing meaning, where the signs gravitate irresistibly around each other so as to reproduce themselves as if by
magnetic recurrence, resulting in dizziness, a loss of meaning,
and the sealing of an indestructible pact amongst the participants.
-

90

SEDUCTION

Generally speaking, "rituality" is, as a form, superior to "sociality". The latter is only a recent, and not very seductive form
of organization and exchange, one invented by humans for humans. Rituality is a much larger system, encompassing the living and the dead, humans and animals, as well as a "nature"
whose periodic movements, recurrences and catastrophes serve,
seemingly spontaneously, as ritual signs. By comparison, sociality appears rather impoverished : under the sign of the Law
it is capable of bringing together only one species (and even
then . . .). By contrast, rituality succeeds in maintaining - not by
laws, but by rules and their infinite play of analogies - a form
of cyclical order and universal exchange of which the Law and
the social are quite incapable.
If we find animals appealing and seductive, it is because they
remind us of this ritual arrangement. They do not; evoke a nostalgia for the savage state, but a feline, theatrical nostalgia for finery,
for the seduction and strategy of ritual forms which transcend
all sociality and which, thereby, still enchant us .
In this sense one can say that, with seduction, !one "becomes
an animal," or that female seduction is animal-like, without implying some sort of instinctive nature . For one is saying that
seduction is profoundly linked. to body rituals ;which, like all
other rituals, serve not to establish a nature and uncover its law,
but to -set up appearances and organize their cycle. Not that female seduction is ethically inferior. On the *contrary, it is aesthetically superior. It is a strategy of finery.
Men, moreover, are never seduced by natural beauty, but by
an artificial, ritual beauty - because the latter is esoteric and
initiatory, whereas the former is merely expressive. And because
seduction lies in the aura of secrecy produced by weightless,
artificial signs, and not in some, natural economy of meaning,
beauty or desire .
The claim that anatomy (or -the body) is not! destiny is not
recent, but was made far more stridently in all ;societies prior
to our own. Rituals, ceremonies, raiments, masks, designs, mutilations and torture - all in order to seduce . . .' the gods, the
spirits, or the dead. The body was the first great medium of
this immense undertaking. For us alone does intake on an aesthetic, decorative character. (With its true character. thereby de-

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 91

nied : the very idea of decoration implies a moral denial of all
the body's magic. For the savages, not to mention animals, it
is not decoration, but finery. And a universal rule. He who is
not painted is stupid, say the Caduveo) .
We might find the forms disgusting : covering the body with
mud, deforming the the skull or filing the teeth in Mexico,
deforming the feet in China, distending the neck, or making
incisions in the face, not to mention tattoos, jewelry, masks, fine
raiments, ritual paintings; or even the bracelets made from tin
cans worn by present-day Polynesians.
The body is made to signify, but with signs that, strictly speaking, have no meaning. All resemblance has vanished, all
representation is absent . The body is covered with appearances,
illusions, traps, animal parodies and sacrificial simulations, not
in order to dissemble, nor to reveal (a desire, say, or a drive),
nor even just for fun (the spontaneous expressiveness of children and primitives). What is involved here is an undertaking
that Artaud would have , termed metaphysical : a sacrificial
challenge to the world to exist. For nothing exists naturally,
things exist because challenged, and because summoned to
respond to that challenge. It is by being challenged that the

powers of the world, including the gods, are aroused; it is by
challenging these powers that they are exorcized, seduced and
captured; it is by the challenge that the game and its rules are
resurrected. All this requires an artificial bluffing, that it to say,
a systematic simulation -that troubles itself with neither a
preestablished state of the world nor bodily anatomy. A radical
metaphysics of simulation, it need not even concern itself with
"natural" harmony. In the facial paintings of the Caduveo, the
facial features are not respected; the design's diagrams and symmetries being laid across the face from one end to the other.
(Our makeup submits to the body as a referential system, in
order to accentuate its features and orifices . But does this mean
that it is closer to the nature of desire? Nothing could be less
certain) .

Something of this radical metaphysics of appearances, this

92

SEDUCTION

challenge by simulation, still lives in the cosmetic arts and the
glamour of modern fashion. The Church Fathers were well
aware of this, and denounced it as diabolical . "To be attentive
to one's body, to care for and paint it is to set oneself up as
a rival of God and contest His creation ." This stigmatization
has continued ever since, but is now reflected ;in that other
religion, that of the subject's liberty and essential desires. Our
entire morality condemns the construction of the female as a
sex object by the facial and bodily arts . The female is no longer
denounced by God's judgment, but by the dictates of modern
ideology, for prostituting her femininity in consumer culture,
and subjecting her body to the reproduction of capital. "Femininity is woman's alienated being." "Femininity manifests itself
as an abstract totality, devoid of any reality it can call its own,
a product of the discourse and ;rhetoric of advertising ." "The
woman flushed with her beauty masks and perpetually fresh
lips no longer lives her real life," etc., etc.
In opposition to all these pious discourses, we must again
praise the sex object ; for it bears, in the sophistication of appearances, something of a challenge to the naive order of the
world and sex; and it, and it alone, escapes the realm of production (though one might like to believe it subjected to the latter)
and returns to that of seduction. In its unrealityin the unreal
defiance of its prostitution of signs, the sexual object moves
beyond sex and attains seduction . It again becomes ceremonial . The feminine was always the effigy of this ritual, and there
is a frightful confusion in wanting to de-sanctify it as a cult object in order to turn it into a subject of production, or in wanting to rescue it from artifice in order to return it to its own
"natural" desires.
Woman is well within her rights, and is indeed
forming a sort of duty, in studying to appear magical and supernatural . It is necessary that she
should astonish and bewitch. Being an idol ; she
must be gilded and adored. She must therefore
borrow from all the arts the means of raising herself above nature, the better to subjugate hearts and
stir souls. It matters very little that her tricks and

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

93

artifices should be known to all, provided that their
success is certain and their effect always irresistible.
Such considerations provide the artist-philosopher
with a ready justification for all the practices employed by women of every period to lend substance and, so to speak, divinity to their fragile
beauty.
An enumeration of these practices would be interminable. But to confine ourselves to what our
contemporaries vulgarly call "the use of cosmetics," who can fail to see that the use of rice-powder
(so stupidly anathematised by our candid
philosophers) has the object and result of banishing from the complexion the blemishes which nature has outrageously sown there, and of creating
an abstract unity in the texture and colour of the
skin; and that this unity, like the unity produced
by the sculptor's chisel, brings the human being
directly nearer to the statue - in other words, to
a being that is divine and superior? As for the lampblack that outlines the eye, and the rouge that emphasizes the upper part of the cheek, the planned
result of these - although their use arises from the
same principle, the need to transcend nature - is
to satisfy an exactly opposite need . The red and
the black represent life - a life surpassing and exceeding that of the nature. The black frame around
the eye makes the glance stranger and more
penetrating; it makes the eye more distinctly
resemble a window open on the infinite . The red
blaze on the cheek further enhances the brightness of the eye, and lends a woman's lovely face
the mysterious passion of a priestess.
Charles Baudelaire, "In Praise of Cosmetics 112
If desire exists - as modernity hypothesizes - then nothing
must interfere with its natural harmony, and cosmetics are
hypocritical . But if desire is a myth - as seduction hypothe-

2 . Charles Baudelaire, "In Praise of Cosmetics" in My Heart Laid Bare and Other
Prose Writings (New York : Vanguard Press, 1951) pp. 63-64 .

94

SEDUCTION

sizes - then nothing can prevent it from being put to use by
signs, unrestrained by natural limits . The power of signs lies
in their appearance and disappearance ; that is how they efface
the world . Cosmetics too are a means of effacing the face, effacing the eyes behind more beautiful eyes, cancelling the lips
behind more luxuriant lips . This "abstract unity that brings the
human being nearer to a being that is divine," this "life surpassing and exceeding nature" about which Baudelaire speaks,
results from a simple artificial stroke that suppresses all expression . Artifice does not alienate the subject, but mysteriously
alters her/him . Women are aware of this transformation when,
in front of their mirrors, they must erase themselves in order
to apply their makeup, and when, by applying their makeup,
they make themselves into a pure appearance denuded of meaning . How can one mistake this "exceeding of nature" for a vulgar camouflaging of truth? Only falsehoods can alienate the
truth, but makeup is not false, or else (like the game of transvestites) it is falser than falsehood and so recovers a kind of superior innocence or transparency. It absorbs all expression
within its own surface, without a trace of blood or meaning.
Certainly this is challenging, and cruel - but who is alienated?
Only those who cannot abide this cruel perfection, and cannot defend themselves except by moral repulsion - and they
are wrong. How can one respond to pure appearances, whether
hieratic or mobile, without first recognizing their. sovereignty?
By taking off the makeup, tearing off the veil, or enjoining the
appearances to disappear? How ridiculous! An iconoclast's utopia. There is no God behind the images, and the very nothingness they conceal must remain a secret . The seduction,
fascination and "aesthetic" attraction of all the great imaginary
processes lies here : in the effacing of every instance, be it the
face and every substance, be it desire -. in the artificial perfection of the sign .

Undoubtedly, the best example of this is to be found in the
only important constellation of collective seduction produced
by modern times, that of film stars or cinema idols. Now the

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 95

star, even if a man, is feminine; for if God is masculine, idols
are always feminine. And in truth, the biggest stars were women. They were, however, no longer beings of flesh and desire,
but transexual, suprasensual beings, around whom crystallized
stern rituals and a wasteful profusion which turned them into
a generation of sacred monsters, endowed with a power of absorption equal to and rivaling the real world's powers of production. They were our only myth in an age incapable of generating
great myths or figures of seduction comparable to those of
mythology or art.
The cinema's power lives in its myth . Its stories, its psychological portraits, its imagination or realism, the meaningful impressions it leaves - these are all secondary. Only the myth is
powerful, and at the heart of the cinematographic myth lies
seduction - that of the renowned seductive figure, a man or
woman (but above all a woman) linked to the ravishing but specious power of the cinematographic image itself. A miraculous
conjunction.
_,
The star is by no means an ideal or sublime being: she is artifical. She need not be an actress in the psychological sense;
her face is not the reflection of a soul or sensitivity which she
does not have . On the contrary, her presence serves to submerge
all sensibility and expression beneath a ritual fascination with
the void, beneath the ecstacy of her gaze and the nullity of her
smile. This is how she achieves mythical status and becomes
subject to collective rites of sacrificial adulation .
The ascension of the cinema idols, the masses' divinities, was
and remains a central story of modern times - it still counterbalances all political or social events . There is no point in dismissing it as merely the dreams of mystified masses . It is a
seductive occurrence that counterbalances every productive occurrence.
To be sure, seduction in the age of the masses is no longer
like that of The Princess of Cleves, Les Liaisons Dangereuses
or Diary of the Seducer, nor for that matter, like that found in
ancient mythology, which undoubtedly contains the stories
richest in seduction . In these seduction is hot, while that of
our modern idols is cold, being at the intersection of two cold
mediums, that of the image and that of the masses .

96 SEDUCTION

This latter seduction has the spectral whiteness of the heavenly stars, after which they are so appropriately named. The masses
have been "seduced" in the modern era by only two great
events : the white light of the stars, and the black light of terrorism . These two phenomena have much in common. Terrorist
acts, like the stars, "flicker :" they do not not enlighten ; they
do not radiate a continuous, white light, but an intermittent,
cold light; they disappoint even as they exalt; they fascinate by
the suddeness of their appearance and the imminence of their
disappearance . And they are constantly being eclipsed as they
each try to outdo each other.
The great stars or seductresses never dazzle because of their
talent or intelligence, but because of their absence. They are
dazzling in their nullity, and in their coldness - the coldness
of makeup and ritual hieraticism (rituals are cool, according to
McLuhan) . They turn into a metaphor the immense glacial
process which has seized hold of our universe of meaning, with
its flickering networks of signs and images; but at the same time,
at a specific historical conjuncture that can no longer be
reproduced, they transform it into an effect of seduction.
The cinema has never shone except .by pure seduction, by
the pure vibrancy of non-sense - a hot shimmering that is all
the more beautiful for having come from the cold.
Artifice and non-sense, they are the idol's esoteric face, its
mask of initiation . The seduction of a face purged of all expression, except that of the ritual smile and a no less conventional
beauty. A white face, with the whiteness of signs consecrated
to ritualized appearances, no longer subject to some deep law
of signification . The sterility of idols is well-known : they do
not reproduce, but rise from the ashes, like the phoenix, or from
their mirror, like the seductress .
These great seductive effigies are our masks, our Easter Island statues. But do not be mistaken: if once, historically, there
were throngs hot with adoration, religious passion, sacrifice
and insurrection, now there are masses cold with seduction and
fascination. Their effigy is cinematographic and implies a different sacrifice.
The death of the stars is merely punishment for their ritualized idolatry. They must die, they must already be dead - so

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 97

that they can be perfect and superficial, with or without their
makeup. But their death must not lead us to a negative abreaction . For behind the only existing form of immortality, that of
artifice, there lies the idea incarnated in the stars, that death
itself shines by its absence, that death can be turned into a brilliant and superficial appearance, that it is itself a seductive
surface. . .

THE IRONIC STRATEGY OF THE SEDUCER
If it is characteristic of the seductress that she turns herself
into an appearance in order to disturb appearances, what is
characteristic of that other figure, the seducer?
He too turns himself into an :illusion in order,to sow confusion, but curiously, this illusion is part of a calculation, with
finery_ giving way to strategy. Now if a woman's finery is also
strategic, a calculated display, is not the seducer's strategy a display of calculation with which to defend himself from some
opposing force? A strategy of finery vs. the finery of strategy . .
Discourses that are too sure of themselves - as with strategies of love - must be understood differently. Though completely "rational," they are still only the instruments of a larger fate,
of which they are as much the victims as the directors. Doesn't
the seducer end up losing himself in his strategy; as in an emotional labyrinth? Doesn't he invent that strategy in order to lose
himself in it? And he who believes himself the game's master,
isn't he the first victim of strategy's tragic myth?
Consider the seducer's obsession with the girl in Kierkegaard's
Diary ofthe Seducer. An obsession with an inviolate, still asexual state, a charmed state of grace. And because she is graced,
one must find grace in her eyes, for like God she possesses a

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 99

matchless vantage. As a result, because naturally endowed with
all seduction, she becomes the object of a savage challenge and

must be destroyed.
The seducer's calling is the extermination of the girl's natural power by an artificial power of his own. He will deliberately
undertake to equal or surpass the natural power to which, in
spite of all that makes him appear as the seducer, he has succumbed since the beginning. His strategy, his intention and destination are a response to the young girl's grace and
seductiveness, to a predestination that is all the more powerful because unconscious, and that must, as a result, be exorcized.
The last word cannot be left to nature : this, fundamentally,
is what is at issue. Her exceptional, innate grace (which, like
the accursed share, is immoral) must be sacrificed by the seducer,
who will seek with all his skill to lead her to the point of erotic
abandon, the point at which she will cease to be a seductive,
that is, dangerous power.
The seducer by himself is nothing; the seduction originates
entirely with the girl . This is why Johannes can claim to have
learned everything from Cordelia . He is not being hypocritical. The calculated seduction mirrors the natural seduction,
drawing from the latter as from its source, but all the better to
eliminate it.
This is also why he does not leave anything to chance, the
girl being deprived of initiative, a seemingly defenseless object
in the game of seduction. She has already played her hand be
fore the seducer begins to play his. Everything has already taken
place; the seduction simply rights a natural imbalance by taking up the pre-existing challenge constituted by the girl's natural
beauty and grace.
Seduction now changes its meaning. Instead of being an immoral and libertine exercise, a cynical deception for sexual ends
(and thus without great interest), it becomes mythical and acquires the dimensions of a sacrifice. This is why the "victim's"
consent is so easily obtained . In her abandon she is, in a sense,
obeying the commands of a divinity who wants everyforce to
be overturned and sacrificed, be it that of power or that of
a natural seductiveness, because all force, and that of beauty
in particular, is sacrilegious . Cordelia is sovereign, and is

10 0 SEDUCTION

sacrificed to her own sovereignty. The reversibility of sacrifice
constitutes a murderous form of symbolic exchange; it spares
nothing, not even life itself, nor even beauty or seduction, which
is its most dangerous form . In this sense, the seducer cannot
claim to be the hero of an erotic master plan; he is only the
agent of a process that goes far beyond him. Nor is the victim
entirely innocent, since, as a beautiful and seductive virgin, she
is in herself a challenge which can only be met by her death
(or her seduction, the equivalent of her murder) .
The Diary of the Seducer is the, script of a perfect crime. None
of the seducer's calculations, none of his manoeuvres fail. It
all unfolds with an infallibility that is neither real nor psychological, but mythical . The artifice's perfection, the apparent inevitability that guides the seducer's actions, simply reflects, as
in a mirror, the perfection of the girl's innate grace, and the inexorable necessity of her sacrifice. This doesn't result from any
specific person's strategy. It is fate, Johannes being only its instrument and, therefore, infallible .
There is something impersonal in every process of seduction,
as in every crime, something ritualistic, something suprasubjective and supra-sensual, the lived experience, whether of
the seducer or his victim, being only its unconsious reflection.
Dramaturgy without -a subject. The ritual execution of a form
that consumes its subjects. This is why the piece takes on both
the aesthetic form of a work of art. and the ritual form of a crime.

In the end, Cordelia is seduced, delivered to the erotic pleasures of a night and then abandoned . One mustn't be surprised
at this, nor consider Johannes, in. line with bourgeois psychology, a hateful person . Seduction, being a sacrificial process, ends
with a murder (the deflowering) - though the latter need not
have taken place. For once Johannes is certain of his victory,
Cordelia is, for him, dead . It is the impure seduction that ends
in love and pleasure, and is, therefore, no longer a sacrifice. Sexuality might be reexamined in this light, as the economic residue
of seduction's sacrificial process, not unlike the residual portion that in ancient sacrifices was left to circulate within the

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

101

economy. Sex then would be merely the discount or balance
of a more fundamental process, a crime or sacrifice, which fails
to attain total reversibility. The gods take their part ; humans share
what's left.
The impure seducer, a Don Juan or Casanova, dedicates himself to the accumulation of this residue. Flying from one sexual conquest to another, he seduces for pleasure without attaining
what Kierkegaard considered the "spiritual" dimension of seduction - where the challenge pushes the woman's seductive
resources and powers to their limit, so that, in accord with a
carefully laid plan, they can be turned against themselves .
The intrigue whereby Cordelia is slowly dispossessed of her
powers, makes one think of the innumerable rites for the exorcism of female powers which can be found throughout primitive societies (Bettelheim) . To cast out women's power of fertility,
to encircle and circumscribe that power, and eventually simulate and appropriate it, is the purpose of the couvades, the artificial invaginations, excoriations and scarrings - all the
innumerable symbolic wounds (up to and including the initiation and institution of a new power: political power) for suppressing the females' incomparable "natural" advantage. One
might also consider ancient Chinese ideas on sexuality, according to which the male, by maintaining the orgasm in suspense,
draws into himself the power of the female yang.
In any case, something has been given to women that must
be exorcized by a deliberate campaign to dispossess her of her
powers . And from this "sacrificial" perspective, there is no difference between feminine seduction and the seducer's strategy :
they both involve the other's death and mental spoliation, the
other's abduction and the abduction of his or her power. It is
always the story of a murder, or better of an aesthetic and sacrificial immolation since, as Kierkegaard suggests, it always occurs
at a spiritual level.

Concerning the "spiritual" pleasure of seduction.
The scenario of seduction is, according to Kierkegaard,
spiritual . It demands a certain spirit in the eighteenth century

10 2 SEDUCTION
sense, that is to say, intelligence, charm and refinement, but also
in the modern sense of the Witz or stroke of wit .
Seduction never plays on the other's desires or amorous
proclivities, this being vulgar, carnal, mechanical and, in short,
uninteresting. Everything must respond by subtle'allusions, with
all the signs enmeshed in the trap. Thus the seducer's artifices
reflect the girl's seductive nature, as though the latter was part
of an ironic stage production, a deception made to measure,
to which she would, effortlessly, come and be' caught .
It is not, therefore, a matter of a frontal attack, but of a diagonal seduction that glides like a (brush?) stroke (and what
is more seductive than a stroke of wit?), with its vivacity and
economy, and its use of the same duplicated materials, to use
Freud's terms. The seducer's weapons are the same as those of
the girl, but turned against her; and it is this reversibility that
gives the strategy its spiritual appeal .
It has been said, and justifiably so, that mirrors are spiritual
- the reflection itself being a stroke of wit . For the mirror's spell
does not lie with the fact that one recognizes oneself in it in itself a rather appalling coincidence - but with the ironic
and mysterious stroke of such a reduplication . Now the seducer's
strategy is precisely that of the mirror. That is why, ultimately,
he doesn't deceive anyone, and why he never deceives himself: for the mirror is infallible (if his manoeuvres and snares
were taken from outside, he would undoubtedly commit some
error) .

Consider another stroke of this type, worthy of being included
in the annals of seduction: the same letter written by two different women - and written not out of perversity, but from a transparency of heart and soul . Both letters contain the same amorous
emotions, these emotions are real, they each have their own
quality. But the latter must not be confused with the "spiritual" pleasure that emanates from the mirror effect produced by
the two letters, and between the two women, which is, strictly speaking, a pleasure of seduction. It is an entirely different,
livelier, more subtle rapture than love . The emotions born of

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

10 3

desire can never equal the exuberant, secret joy one experiences
when playing with desire itself. Desire is simply a referent like
any other, which seduction immediately betters and transcends,
precisely by virtue of its its spirit . Seduction is a stroke : here
it short-circuits the two recipients in a kind of imaginary overprinting, wherein desire perhaps confuses them . At any rate,
this stroke confuses desire, renders it indistint, producing a slight
giddiness that proceeds from a superior indifference, and from
the laughter that undermines its still too serious entanglement .
To seduce, then, is to make both the figures and the signs
- the latter held by their own illusions - play amongst themselves . Seduction is never the result of physical attraction, a conjunction of affects or an economy of desire . For seduction to
occur an illusion must intervene and mix up the images ; a stroke
has to bring disconnected things together, as if in a dream, or
suddenly disconnect undivided things . Thus the second woman
is irresistibly tempted to rewrite the first letter, as if a temptation could function autonomously and ironically, as if the very
idea could be seductive. A game without end, in which the signs
participate spontaneously, as if from a continuous sense of irony. Perhaps the signs want to be seduced, perhaps they desire,
more profoundly than men, to seduce and be seduced.

Perhaps signs are not destined to enter into fixed oppositions
for meaningful ends, that being only their present destination .
Their actual destiny is perhaps quite different: to seduce each
other and, thereby, seduce us. If such is the case, an entirely
different logic would lie behind their'secret circulation.
Can one imagine a theory that would treat signs in terms of
their seductive attraction, rather than their contrasts and oppositions? Which would break with the specular nature of the
sign and the encoumbrance of the referent? An in which the
terms would play amongst themselves within the framework
of an enigmatic duel and an inexorable reversibility?
Suppose that all the major, diacritical oppositions with which
we order our world were traversed by seduction, instead of being based on contrasts and oppositions. Suppose not just that

104 SEDUCTION

the feminine seduces the masculine, but that absence seduces
presence, cold seduces hot, the subject seduces the object, and
to be sure, the reverse. For seduction supposes that minimum
reversibility which puts an end to every fixed opposition and,
therefore, every conventional semiology. Towards an inverted
semiology?
One might imagine (but why imagine it, when it occured in
ancient Greece) that gods and mortals, instead of being separated by the moral abyss of religion, sought to seduce each other
and, indeed, maintained no other relations but those of seduction . Moreover, perhaps all the :major distinctions we use to
decipher the world and confine it within its prison of meaning, those between, for example, good and evil, or true and
false - all the terms that have been so carefully distinguished
at such enormous costs of energy - have not always succeeded. The real catastrophes, the real revolutions always consist
in the implosion of one of these two-term systems. A universe,
or fragment of the universe, then comes to an end - though
usually this implosion occurs slowly, the terms being gradually worn down . At present we are witnessing the slow and simultaneous erosion of all the polar structures, and the movement
towards a universe that is losing the very dimension of meaning. Disinvested, disenchanted, and disaffected - the end of the
world as will and representation.
But this neutralization is not seductive. Seduction pushes the
terms towards each other, and unites them at a point of maximum energy and charm; it does not blur them together in a
state of minimum intensity.
Now suppose that wherever relations of opposition presently
exist, relations of seduction are put into play. Imagine a flash
of seduction that causes the polar or differential, transistorized
circuits of meaning to melt? There are examples of of a nondiacritical semiology (that is to say, a non-semiology) . The elements of the ancient cosmogony; for example, did not enter
into structural relations of classification (water/fire, air/earth,
etc.): they were not "distinctive" elements, but "attractive" elements that seduced each other: water seduces fire, water
seduced by fire.
Such seduction is still quite strong in the duel, relations of

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 10 5

non-individualized castes and hierarchies, and in the analogical systems that preceded our logical systems of differentiation.
And no doubt logical sequences of meaning are still worked
over by analogical sequences of seduction - like an immense
flash of inspiration that, at a single stroke, brings opposites
together. Beneath meaning lies the secret circulation of seductive analogies.
We are not, however, dealing with a new version of universal attraction. The diagonals or transversals of seduction may
well break the oppositions between terms ; they do not lead
to fused or con-fused relations (that's mysticism) but to dual
relations. It is not a matter of a mystical fusion of subject or
object, or signifier and signified, masculine and feminine, etc.,
but of a seduction, that is, a duel and agonistic relation .

A mirror hangs on the opposite wall
she does not reflect on it
but the mirror reflects her
Diary of the Seducer3
The seducer's strategm will be to merge with the mirror on
the opposite wall in which the girl is reflected. She does not
give it a thought, but the mirror is reflecting on her.
One should distrust the humility of mirrors. The humble servants ofappearances, they can reflect only the objects that face
them, without being able to conceal themselves . The whole
world is grateful to them (except in death when, for this reason, one veils them); they are the watchdogs of appearance.
But their faithfulness is specious, for they are waiting for someone to catch himself in their reflection. One does not easily
forget their sidelong gaze. They recognize you, and when they
surprise you when you least expect it, your time has come.
Such is the seducer's strategy : he gives himself the humility
of the mirror, but a skilful mirror, like Perseus' shield, in which
3. Soren Kierkegaard, Diary of the Seducer, appended to
Princeton University Press, 1971) p. 311 .

EitherlOr

(Princeton:

lob SEDUCTION
Medusa found herself petrified. The girl too is going to fall captive to the mirror that reflects and analyzes her', without her
knowledge.
He who does not know how to compass. a girl
about so that she loses sight of everything which
he does not wish her to see, he who does not
know how to poetize himself in a girl's feeling so
that it is from her that everything issues as he wishes it, he is and remains a bungler; I do not
begrudge him his enjoyment . A bungler he'is and
remains, a seducer, something one can by no means call me. I am an aesthete, an eroticist, one who
has understood the nature and meaning of love,
who believes in love and knows it from the ground
up. . . I know, too, that the highest conceivable enjoyment lies in being loved . . . To poetize oneself
into a young girl is an art, to poetize oneself out
of her is a masterpiece. (pp. 363-64)
Seduction is never linear, and does not wear a mask (that is
vulgar seduction) - it is oblique.
. .what weapon is so sharp, so penetrating, so, flashing in action, and hence so deceptive, as the eye?
You feint a high quart, as fencers say, and attack
in second. . . The moment of the feint is indescribable. The opponent, as it were, feels the slash, he
is touched! Aye, that is true, but in quite a different place from where he thought. (p. 314)'
I do not meet her, I touch only the periphery of
her existence I prefer to arrive a little early and
then to meet her, if possible, at the door or'upon
the steps as she is coming and I am leaving, when
I pass her by indifferently. This is the first net in
which she must be entangled. I never stop her on
the street ; I may bow to her, but I never come ; close
to her, but always keep my distance . Our continu-

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

107

al encounters are certainly noticeable to her; she
does indeed perceive that a new body has appeared on her horizon whose orbit in a strangely
imperturbable manner affects her own disturbingly, but she has no conception of the law governing this movement ; she is rather inclined to look
about to see if she can discover the point controlling it, but she is as ignorant of being herself this
focus as if she were a Chinaman . (pp. 336-37)
There is another type of indirect reverberation : hypnosis, a
sort of psychic mirror in which, once again, the girl is reflected without her awareness, under someone else's gaze :
Today my eyes have for the first time rested upon
her. Someone has said that sleep can make the eyelids so heavy that they close of themselves ; perhaps
my glance has a similar effect upon Cordelia . Here
eyes close, and yet an obscure force stirs within
her. She does not see that I am looking at her, she
feels it, feels it through her whole body. Her eyes
close, and it is night ; but within her it is luminous
day. (pp. 360-61)
This obliquity of seduction is not duplicity. Where a linear
movement knocks against the wall of consciousness and acquires only meager gains, seduction has the obliquity of a dream
element or stroke of wit, and as such traverses the psychic
universe and its different levels in a single diagonal, in order
to touch, at the far end, the unknown blind spot, the secret
that lies sealed, the enigma that constitutes the girl, even to
herself.
Seduction has two simultaneous moments, or two instants
of a single moment. Her entire character, all her feminine
resources must be mobilized, and simultaneously suspended.
It is not a question of surprising her in the passivity of her innocence; her freedom of action must be in play. Because it is
by this freedom, by its movement - and by the curves and sudden twists imparted to it by seduction - that she must, seemingly spontaneously, reach that point where, unbeknownst to

10 8

SEDUCTION

herself, she will be lost . Seduction engages a fate ; and in order
for it to be realized, she must be completely free, but in her
freedom . she must reach out, as if somnabulistically, towards
her own fall . The girl must be :plunged into this second state
which reduplicates the first, the state of grace and sovereignty.
And this second, somnambulistic state must be sustained, so
that a passion, once awakened and intoxicated with itself, slips
into the trap fate has set for it. "Her eyes close, and it is night,
but within her it is luminous day."
Omissions, denials, deflections, deceptions, diversions and
humility - all aimed at provoking this second state, the secret
of true seduction . Vulgar seduction might proceed by persistence, but true seduction proceeds by absence; or better it invents a kind of curved space, where the signs are deflected from
their trajectory and returned to their source . This state of suspense is essential : it is the moment of the girl's disarray before
what awaits her, even as she knows - and this is something new
and already fatal - that something awaits her. A moment of high
intensity, a "spiritual" moment (in Kierkegaard's sense), similar to that in games of chance between the throw and the moment when the dice stop rolling.
Thus the first time he hears her give out her address, he refuses to remember it :
I will not listen to it, for I do not wish to deprive
myself of surprise; I shall certainly meet her again
in life, I shall recognize her, and perhaps she will
recognize me. . . If she does not recognize me, if
her glance does not immediately convince me of
that, then I shall surely find an opportunity to look
at her from the side. I promise that she will remember the situation. No impatience, no greediness,
everything should be enjoyed in leisurely draughts ;
she is marked out, she shall be run down . (p. 312)
The seducer is playing with himself. At this point it is not
even a ruse, with the seducer being the one delighted at the
seduction's deferment. This, the pleasure of the approach,
should not be slighted ; for it is in this interval that he begins

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 10 9

to dig the pit into which she will fall. It is like fencing: one needs
a field for the feint. Throughout this period, the seducer, far
from seeking to close in on her, seeks to maintain his distance
by various ploys : he does not speak directly to her but only
to her aunt, and then about trivial or stupid subjects; he neutralizes everything by irony and feigned pedanticism; he fails
to respond to any feminine or erotic movement, and even finds
her a sitcom suitor to disenchant her of her love. To keep one's
distance, to put her off, to disenchant and deceive her, to the
point where she herself takes the initiative and breaks off her
engagement, thus completing the seduction and creating the
ideal situation for her total abandon.
The seducer knows how to let the signs hang . He knows that
they are favourable only when left suspended, and will move
of themselves towards their appointed destiny. He does not use
the signs up all at once, but waits for the moment when they
will all respond, one after the other, creating an entirely unique
conjuncture of giddiness and collapse.
When she is in the company of the three Jansens
she talks very little, their chatter evidently bores
her, and certainly the smile on her lips seems to
indicate it. I am relying on that smile.
Today I went to Mrs. Jansen's. I half opened the
door without knocking. . . She sat alone at the piano. . . I might have rushed in, seized the moment
- that would have been foolish. . ..She is evidently concealing the fact that she plays. . . When sometime I can talk more confidentially with her, I shall
slyly lead her to this point and let her fall into the
trap . (pp. 338-9) .
He has not reached the vulgar diversions, the bits of libertine bravura, the erotic whims (which will occupy an increasingly large part of the story, with Cordelia hardly ever appearing
except beneath a lively, libertine imagination : "To love one alone
is too little ; to love them all suggests the lightness of a superficial character; but to love as many as possible. . . What pleasure!
What a life!") He has not acceded to the frivolous seduction

11 0

SEDUCTION

which is not part of the "grand game" of seduction, with its
philosophy of obliquity and diversion. The "grand" seduction
may make its way secretly along the same paths as vile seduction, but will play them as suspense or parody. Confusion is
not possible : the one is a game of love, the other a spiritual
duel . All the interludes only accentuate the slow, calculated,
and inevitable rhythm of "high" seduction. The mirror still
hangs on the opposite wall, even if we are no longer aware of
it - and time in Cordelia's heart is on the march .
The process seems to reach its lowest point with the~seducer's
betrothal. Here one has the impression of having attained a point
of extreme numbness, where the seducer pushes the subterfuge of disenchantment or dissuasion to an almost perverse
degree of mortification . And one has the impression that, as
a result, Cordelia's spirit is broken, her femininity run down,
neutralized by the illusions that surround her. The moment of
the engagement - which "has so much importance for a young
girl that her entire soul can be fixed on it, like that of a dying
man on his last will" - this moment, Cordelia will live without
understanding, deprived of every reaction, muzzled, circumvented .
One word, and she would have laughed at me, one
word, and she would have been moved, one word,
and she would have fled from me; but no word
crossed my lips, I remained stolidly serious, and
kept exactly to the ritual . As regards my engagement, I do not boast that it is poetic, it is in every
way philistine and bourgeois. So now I 'am engaged; so is Cordelia (so is Cordelia!) and that is
all she knows about the whole matter. (pp. 370-71)
It is all a kind of ordeal, as found in initiation rites. The initiated must pass through a phase that marks his.or her death,
not as pathetic suffering, but as nothingness, as emptiness the final moment before the passion's illumination and the erotic
abandon. In a sense, the seducer adds an ascetic moment to
the aesthetic movement he imparts to the whole .

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

III

Generally I can assure any girl who entrusts herself to me a perfect aesthetic conduct: only it ends
with her being deceived . . . (p. 375)
There is a sort of humour in the fact that the engagement
coincides with the apparent disappearance of all that was at
stake in the seduction . What in the bourgeois vision of the
nineteenth century constitutes a joyous prelude to marriage,
is here an austere initiation into the sublime ends of passion
(which are, simultaneously, the calculated ends of seduction)
by the somnabulist passage across the deserts of betrothal.
(Don't forget that the engagement was a crucial moment in the
life of many a romantic, including Kierkegaard, but also and
more dramatically of Kleist, Holderlin, Novalis and Kafka. A painful moment of seemingly endless frustration, the almost mystical passion sustained by the engagement was perhaps (let us
drop all talk of sexual impotence!) a matter of suspension, of
a suspended enchantment, haunted by the fear of sexual or
matrimonial disenchantment.)
However, Johannes continues to live the invisible dance of
seduction, even as his objective and its presence appear to have
faded. Indeed, he will never live it more intensely, for it is here,
in the nullity, in the absence, in the mirror's face that its triumph is assured: she cannot but break off her former engagement and throw herself into his arms. All the fire of her passion
lies revealed, just beneath the surface, in its transparence. He
will never again find it as beautiful as in this premonition, for
at this moment the girl still remains predestined - which will
no longer be the case once this moment is over.
Now the giddiness of seduction, as of every passion, lies above
all with its predestination. The latter alone provides that fatal
quality at the basis of all pleasure - that stroke of wit, as it were,
which ties, as if in advance, a movement of the soul to its destiny and its death. Here lies the seducer's triumph. And here,
in the invisible dance of the betrothal, one is able to see his
knowledge of seduction, of true seduction, as a spiritual
economy.
My relation to her is that of an unseen partner in

11 2

SEDUCTION

a dance which is danced by. only one, when it
should really be danced by two. She moves as in
a dream, and yet she dances with another, and this
other is myself, who, in so far as I am visibly
present, am invisible, in so far I am invisible, am
visible. The movements of the dance require a partner, she bows to him, she takes his hand, she flees,
she draws near him again . I take her hand, I complete her thought as if it were completed'in herself. She moves to the inner melody of her own
soul; I am only the occasion for her movement .
I am not amorous, that would only awaken her;
I am easy, yielding, impersonal, almost like a
mood . (p. 376)
.
Thus seduction is presented in a single movement as:
- a conspiracy of power : a sacrificial form .
- a murder and, ultimately, a perfect crime.
- a work of art: "Seduction considered as one of the BeauxArts" (like murder, to be sure).
- a stroke of wit or flash of inspiration: a "spiritual" economy.
With the same duel complity as a stroke of wit, here everything is exchanged allusively, without being spelled out, the
equivalent of the allusive, ceremonial exchange, of a secret .
- an ascetic form of a spiritual, but also pedagogical ordeal :
a sort of school of passion, a simultaneously erotic and ironic
maieutics.
I shall always acknowledge that a young girl is a
born teacher, from whore one can always learn,
if nothing else, how to deceive her - for one only
learns this best from the girls themselves. . . (pp.
382-83)
Every young girl is, in relation to the labryinth of
her heart, an Ariadne; she holds the thread by
which one finds his way through it, but she has
it, without herself knowing how to use it . (p. 396)

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 113
- a form of duel or war, an agonal form . It never takes the form
of violence or a relation of force, but of a war game . In it one
discovers the two simultaneous movements of seduction, as
found in every strategy:
So now the first war with Cordelia begins, in which
I flee, and thereby teach her to triumph in pursuing me. I constantly retreat before her, and in this
retreat, I teach her through myself to know all the
power of love, its unquiet thoughts, its passion,
what longing is, and hope, and impatient expectation . . . She will gain courage to believe in love . . .
She must never suspect that she owes this freedom
to me . . . When she at last feels free, so free that she
is almost tempted to break with me, then the second war begins . Now she has power and passion,
and the struggle becomes worthwhile to me .
Let her forsake me, the second war is just beginning . . . The first war was a war of liberation, it was
only a game ; the second is a war of conquest, it
is for life and death. (pp. 379-80)
The stakes are all organized around the girl as mythical figure .
Both adversary and objective in this many-sided duel, she is,
therefore, neither a sex object nor a figure of the Eternal Feminine - the two great, Western references to woman are equally
foreign to seduction . And there is no more an ideal victim or .
ideal subject (the girl and her seducer respectively), than there
is an executioner and victim in a sacrifice. The fascination she
exercises is that of a mythical figure, an enigmatic partner, a
protagonist equal to the seducer in this almost liturgical realm
of challenge and duel .

How different from Les Liaisons Dangereuses! In Laclos the
woman to be seduced appears as a stronghold to be taken, in
the manner of the military strategy of the period - the strategy

11 4

SEDUCTION

may be less static than before, but the objective remains the
same, her surrender. The Presidente is a fortress to be besieged,
and she must fall . There is no seduction here - only siegecraft.
Where there is seduction is not in the relation between
seducer and victim, but in that between the seducers, de
Valmont and Merteuil, who share a criminal conspiracy by interposed victims. Similarly in the Marquis de Sade, there is only
the secret society glorifying in its crimes, while the victims are
nullities.
There is none of the subtle art of the turnaround which already appears in SunTseu's Art of War, or in zen philosophy
and the oriental martial arts. Or as here, in seduction, where
the girl, her passion and liberty, are very much .a part of the
strategy's unfolding . "She was an enigma that, enigmatically,
possessed in her its own resolution ."
i

In this duel, everything turns on the movement from ethics
to aesthetics, from a naive to a conscious passion :
So far I should call her passion a naive passion.
When the change comes, and I begin to draw back
in earnest then she will really muster all her
resources in order to captivate me. She has no way
to accomplish this except by means of the ;erotic,
but this will now appear on a very different scale.
It then becomes the weapon in her hand which
she swings against me. Then I have the reflected
passion . She fights for her own sake because she
knows that I possess the erotic ; she fights for her
own sake in order to overcome me. She develops
in herself a higher form of the erotic . What I taught
her to suspect by inflaming her, my coldness now
teaches her to understand, but in such a way that
she believes she discovered it herself. Through this
she will try to take me by surprise ; she will believe that her boldness has outstripped me, and
that she has thereby caught me. Then her passion

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

11 5

becomes definite, energetic, conclusive, logical; her
kiss total, her embrace firm. (p. 406)
The ethics is formed of simplicity and naturalness (including the simplicity of desire), of which the girl's naive grace and
spontaneity are a part . The aesthetics is formed of artifice, the
play of signs - it is seduction. Every ethics must resolve itself
into an aesthetics. For Kierkegaard's seducer, as for Schiller,
Hblderlin, or even Marcuse, the passage to aesthetics is the
highest movement granted the human species . But the seducer's
aesthetics is quite different : it is not divine and transcendent,
but ironic and diabolical ; it does not have the form of an ideal,
but of a stroke of wit; it does not go beyond ethics ; it is deflection, inflection, seduction, and transfiguration, as realized by
the mirror of deception. This, however, is not to say that the
seducer's strategy is perverse ; it is a part of that aesthetics of
irony which seeks to transform a vulgar, physical eroticism into
a passion, and stroke of wit.
I have noticed that she always calls me mine when
she writes to me; but she lacks the courage to say
it to me. Today I begged her to do it, with all the
insinuating and erotic warmth possible . She started to do so ; an ironic glance, indescribably swift
and brief, was enough to make it impossible for
her, although my lips urged her with all their
might . This mood is entirely normal . (p. 419)
Erotically she is completely equipped for the struggle, she fights with the darts of her eyes, with the
command of her brows, with the secretiveness of
her forehead, with the eloquence of her bosom,
with the dangerous allurement of the embrace,
with the prayer of her lips, with the .smile on her
face, with all the sweet longing of her entire being. There is a power in her, an energy, as if she
were a valkyrie ; but this erotic force is in turn tempered by a certain languishing weakness which is
breathed out over her. - She must not be held too
long at this peak. . . (p. 419)

116 SEDUCTION

Irony always prevents the mortal emotional demonstrations
that anticipate the game's end and threaten to cut. short the untried possibilities held by each of the players. Seduction alone
can deploy the latter, but only by keeping things in suspense,
by an ironic clinamen, and by that disillusion which leaves the
field of aesthetics open .
Sometimes the seducer has his weaknesses . Thus it happens
that in a surfeit of emotion he launches into a panegyric to female beauty in its infinite divisibility, detailed in its' minute erotic
variations (pp. 423-24), and then assembled into a single figure,
within the heated imagination of an inflamed desire . A vision
of God - but immediately taken up and~turned around in the
imagination of the Devil, in the cold imagination of appearances.
Woman is man's dream - God, moreover, drew her from man
when he was asleep. She therefore has all the traits of a dream,
and in her, one might say, the diurnal scraps of the real combine to form a mirage.
'
She awakens first at the touch of love; before that
time she is a dream. Yet in her dream life we can
distinguish two stages : in the first love dreams
about her ; in the second, she dreams about love
(p. 425)

The end comes when she has given herself fully. She is dead,
she has lost the grace of her appearance and become her sex ;
she becomes a woman. For one last moment. "[W]hen she then
stands decked out as a bride, and all the magnificence of her
attire pales before her beauty, and she herself turns pale . . ."
(p. 431), she still has the splendour of appearances - but soon
it will be too late.
Such is the metaphysical lot of the seducer. Beauty, meaning, substance, and above everything else, God are ethically
jealous of themselves. Most things are ethically possessive ; they
keep their secrets, and watch over their meanings. Seduction,
being on the side of the appearances and the Devil, is aesthetically possessive.

After the final abandonment (Cordelia abandons herself, and

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

11 7

she is immediately abandoned), Johannes asks himself: "Have
I been constantly faithful to my pact in my relation to Cordelia? That is to say, my pact with the aesthetic. For it is this which
makes me strong, that I always have the idea on my side . . . Has
the interesting always been preserved?" (p. 432) . Merely to
seduce is interesting only in the first degree ; but here it is a
matter of what is interesting in the second degree. This doubling is the secret of the aesthetics . Only what is interesting
about the interesting has seduction's aesthetic force.
In a sense, the seducer strives to have the girl's natural charms
rise to and shine in the world of pure appearances, i.e., in the
sphere of seduction - and there destroy them . For most things,
alas, have meaning and depth; but only some of them rise to
the level of appearances, and they alone are truly seductive.
Seduction lies in the transformation of things into pure appearances.

That is how seduction is realized as myth, in the giddiness
of appearances, just before being committed to reality. "Everything is symbol; I myself am a myth about myself, for is it not
as a myth that I hasten to this meeting? . . .Drive now for dear
life, even if the horses drop dead, only not a single second before we reach the place." (p. 439)
A single night, and it's all over. "I hope never to see her again."
She gives everything and falls, like those countless virgins of
Greek mythology who were transformed into flowers, and thereby achieved a vegetative and lugubrious grace, the echo of the
seduction grace of their first life. But, adds Kierkegaard's seducer
cruelly : ". . :the time is past when a girl suffering the pain of a
faithless love can be changed into a sunflower." (p. 439) And
in a still more cruel and unexpected manner : "If I were a god,
I would do for her what Neptune did for a nymph: I would
change her into a man." (p. 440) . In a word, the woman does
not exist. Only the girl exists by the sublime nature of her state,
and the man, by his power to destroy her.
But the mythical passion of seduction does not cease to be
ironic. It is crowned with one last melancholy stroke : the ar-

11 8

SEDUCTION

rangement of the interior that will be the setting for the lovers'
abandon . One last moment of suspense as the seducer brings
together all the scattered lines of his strategy and contemplates
them as though before death. What should have been a triumphant setting is already no more than the doleful site of a defunct
story. Everything in this house is reconstituted so as to seize
hold of Cordelia's imagination at a stroke, at that final moment
when she is to be toppled . There is the cabinet in which they
met, with the same sofa, the same lamp, the same tea table, as
it was all "purported to be" yesterday, and is here today, by virtue of an exact resemblance. On the open piano, on the musicrest the same little Swedish melody - Cordelia will enter by
the door at the back. Everything is foreseen : she will discover
all the scenes they lived together recapitulated . The illusion is
perfect. In fact, the game has reached its end, butt the seducer
reaches new heights of irony by bringing together all the threads
he has woven since the beginning in one last display of fireworks, which is, at the same time, a parodic funeral oration to .
their consummated love.
After which Cordelia will no longer appear, except in several desperate letters that open the story, and even her despair
is strange. She was not exactly deceived or dispossessed, but
spiritually diverted by a game whose rules she was not aware
of. She was played with, as though under a spell. She has the
impression of having been, without realizing it, the trophy in
some very intimate and devastating plot, the object of a spiritual
abduction. In effect, she was robbed of her own seduction,
which was then turned against her. Hers is a nameless fate, and
the stupor that results is different from mere despair.
Such victims were of a quite distinct' nature .
. . .There was no visible change in their appearance ;
they maintained their customary relationships, as
respected as ever, and yet they were changed,
almost inexplicably to themselves . .. Their lives
were not like those snapped off or broken, but
they had become introspective; lost to others, they
vainly sought to find themselves . (p. 303)

THE FEAR OF BEING SEDUCED
If seduction is a passion or destiny, it is usually the opposite
passion that prevails - that of not being seduced. We struggle
to confirm ourselves in our truth : we fight against that which
seeks to seduce us .
In this struggle all means are acceptable, ranging from relentlessly seducing the other in order not to be seduced oneself,
to pretending to be seduced in order to cut all seduction short.

The hysteric combines the passion of seduction with that of
simulation . She protects herself from seduction by offering
booby-trapped signs which, even as they put themselves forward in exaggerated fashion, cannot be believed . The scruples,
the excessive remorse, the pathetic advances and endless entreaties, her way of spinning events so that they dissolve and
she herself becomes elusive, the giddiness she imposes on
others, and the deception - it is all seductive deterrence, whose
obscure objective is less to seduce than to never let oneself
seduce .
The hysteric has no intimacy, emotions, or secrets. She is entirely given over to external blackmail, to the ephemeral but
total credibility of her "symptoms," the absolute need to be be-

12 0 SEDUCTION

lieved (like the mythomaniac with his stories) but at the same
time, to disappoint all belief - and this without appealing to
some shared delusion . An uncompromising demand, but completely insensitive as to its response. A demand that is put into
question by its choreography, and by the effect of its signs.
Seduction too mocks the truth of signs, but makes it into a reversible appearance, while the hysteric plays with the signs but
without sharing them . It is as if she appropriated the entire
process of seduction for herself;, as if she was bidding with herself, while leaving the other only the ultimatum of her hysterical conversion, without any possible reversion . The hysteric
succeeds in making her own body a barrier to seduction: a
seductress paralyzed by her own body and fascinated by her
own symptoms. And who seeks to petrify others in turn, by
an elusiveness that seeks to allay suspicions, but remains only
a pathetic psychodrama. If seduction is a challenge, hysteria is
blackmail.
Most signs and messages today solicit us in this hysterical manner. They would make-us-believe, make-us-speak and make-uscome by dissuasion . They would blackmail us with a blind, psychodramatic transaction, using signs devoid of meaning, that
multiply and hypertrophy precisely because they no longer have
any secrets or credibility. Signs without faith, without affect or
history, signs terrified at the idea of signifying - just as the hysteric is terrified at the idea of being seduced .
In reality, the inner absence that inheres in the self terrifies
the hysteric. She must drain herself, with her continual play,
of this absence in the secrecy of which she couldbe loved, and
could love herself. In this way she forms a mirror behind which
- near suicide, but turning suicide, like everything else, into a
bothersome, theatrical process of seduction - she remains immortal in her "spectacular" domain.
The same process, but reversed, can be found in anorexia,
frigidity and impotence. By turning one's body into a mirror
- but a mirror that has, as it were, been turned against the wall
by effacing the potential seductiveness of one's body - by disenchanting and desexualizing it, one is still resorting to blackmail and delivering an ultimatum: "You will not seduce me, I
dare you to try." Seduction, however, shows through in its very

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

12 1

negation, since the dare is one of its fundamental forms. A
challenge must be met with a response, (without wanting to)
a challenge has to let itself seduce - but here the game has been
closed down . And closed down all the more emphatically by
the body, by its dramatization of a refusal of seduction - while
the hysteric gets out of the game by dramatizing a demand for
seduction. In both cases, however, seduction, whether as
seducer or seduced, is denied .
The problem, therefore, is not one of sexual or alimentary
impotence, with its train of psychoanalytic reasons and unreason, but concerns an impotence as regards seduction . The disaffection, neurosis, anguish and frustration encountered by
psychoanalysis comes no doubt from being unable to love or
to be loved, from being unable to give or take pleasure, but the
radical disenchantment comes from seduction and its failure.
Only those who lie completely outside seduction are ill, even
if they remain fully capable of loving and making love. Psychoanalysis believes it treats the disorders of sex and desire,
but in reality it is dealing with the disorders of seduction (which
it has helped, not inconsiderably, to place outside seduction
and imprison within the dilemma of sex). The most serious deficiencies always concern charm and not pleasure, enchantment
and not some vital or sexual satisfaction, the (game's) rule and
not the (symbolic) Law. To be deprived of seduction is the only
true form of castration .
Fortunately, the latter continuously fails . Seduction rises like
the phoenix from the ashes, with the subject being unable to
prevent all this from again becoming, as with anorexia or impotence, a last desperate attempt at seduction, and the denial
from again becoming a dare. Perhaps it is in these aggravated
forms of sexual self-denial that seduction expresses itself in its
purest form, since it still asks the other to : "Prove to me that
it's not just a matter of `that: "

There are other passions opposed to seduction, though fortunately, they too usually fail when taken to extremes. The passion for collecting, for example, the fetishism of the collector.

12 2

SEDUCTION

Its antagonistic affinity with seduction is strong, perhaps because it too involves a game with rules, whose intensity is such
that it can substitute itself for any other game. For it too invokes
a passion for an abstraction that defies every moral law, in
order to maintain the rigid ceremonial of the closed universe
within which the subject confines himself.
The collector is possessive . He seeks exclusive rights over the
dead object with which he appeases his fetishist passion. Reclusion and confinement: beyond all else he is collecting himself.
And he is not to be distracted from his madness, since his love
of the object, the amorous stratagems with which he surrounds
it, display a hatred and fear of seduction. And not just the seductiveness of the object : he is just as repelled by any seduction
that might emanate from himself.
The Collector, the film and novel, illustrate this delirium . The
protagonist, being unable to seduce or be loved (but does he
want seduction and the spontaneity of love? certainly not - he
wants to force the seduction, he wants to force love), kidnaps
a young woman and confines her in the basement of his country house, which has been specially equipped for the purpose.
He installs her, cares for her, surrounds her with numerous
courtesies, but checks all attempts at escape, outsmarts all her
ruses, and will spare her only if she admits herself defeated and
She loves him spontaneously. In
seduced, only if, in the, end,
time, however, with this forced promiscuity, an indecisive and
troubled connivence forms between them - and one evening
he- invites her to dine upstairs, with all precautions taken . And
what happens? She genuinely tries to seduce him and offers
herself to him. Perhaps she loves him at this moment, perhaps
she only wants to disarm him. Both no doubt.'But whatever
the case, her behaviour provokes a panic reaction, and he hits
her, insults her and throws her back in the cave. . He no longer
respects her, he undresses her and takes pornographic pictures
which he places in a photo album (he collects butterflies, and
has shown her his collection with pride) . She gets sick and falls
into a sort of coma : he no longer cares for her : she dies and
he buries her in his yard . In the last scene, he is seen looking
for another woman to kidnap and seduce at whatever cost.
A need to be loved, but an inability to be seduced. When,

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 12 3

finally, the woman is seduced (it is enough that she wants to
seduce him) he cannot accept his victory: he prefers to see it
as a sexual malediction and punishes her. It is not a question
of impotence (it is never a question of impotence) . He prefers
the possessive spell cast by a collection of dead objects - the
dead sex object being as beautiful as a butterfly with florescent wings - to the seduction of a living being who would demand his love in return . He prefers the monotonous fascination
of the collection, the fascination with dead differences, this obsession with the same, over the seduction of the other. This
is why one senses from the beginning that she will die, not because he is a dangerous madman, but because he is logical, motivated by an irreversible logic. To seduce without being seduced
- without reversibility.
In this case, one of the two terms must die, and it is always
the same since the other is already dead . The other is immortal and indestructible, as in every perversion. This is illustrated
by the fact that the film ends where it began (and not without
humour - possessive people, like perverse people, have a good
sense ofhumour outside the sphere of their obsession, including
in the minutiae of their proceedings) . In any case, the collector has enclosed himself within an insoluble logic: all the signs
of love she can give him will be interpreted in a contrary manner. And the most tender will be the most suspect. He might
perhaps be satisfied with the appropriate signs, but he cannot
bear the genuine enticements of love. Within his logic, she has
signed her own death warrant.
This is not a story about sadism - it is too moving. Who said
that the best proof of love is to respect the other and his or
her desires? Perhaps the price paid by beauty and seduction
is to be confined and put to death, because they are too dangerous, and because one will never be able to render her what
she has given. One can then only reward her with her death.
In a sense, the girl recognizes this since she responds to this
higher seduction offered her in the metaphor of her confinement. It is just that she cannot respond except by offering herself sexually - and this appears trivial relative to the challenge
she herselfposes by her beauty. Sexual pleasure will never abolish the need for seduction. Formerly all mortals were obliged

12 4

SEDUCTION

to redeem their living bodies with a sacrifice ; today all seductive forms, perhaps all living forms, have to redeem themselves
by their death . This is a symbolic law - which is, moreover,
not a law but an unavoidable rule, that is, we adhere to it without
grounds, as something arbitrary yet obvious, and not in accord
with some transcendent principle.
Should one conclude that every attempt at seduction ends
with the murder of the object, or that it always - and this is
a variation on the same theme - involves an attempt to drive
the other mad? Is the spell one exercises over the other always
harmful? Is one only seeking to avenge the spell,that the other
exercises over you? Is the gams: being played here a game of
life or death, or at least closer to death than the serene exchange
of sexual pleasure? To seduce implies that the other will pay
for the fact of being seduced, that is, for having been torn from
him/herself and made into an object of sorcery. Here everything obeys the symbolic rule of immediate apportionment
which dictates the sacrificial relations between men and their
gods in cultures of cruelty, that is, relations of recognition and
dispensation of unlimited violence. Now seduction belongs to
cultures of cruelty, and is the only ceremonial form of the latter left to us. It is what draws our attention to death, not in its
organic and accidental form, but as something necessary and
rigorous, the inevitable consequence of the game's rules. Death
remains the ultimate risk in every symbolic pact, be it that supposed by a challenge, a secret, a seduction or a perversion.

Seduction and perversion maintain subtle relations. Doesn't
seduction imply a form of the diversion of the world's order?
And yet, of all the passions, of all the movements of the soul,
perversion is perhaps the most opposed to seduction.
Both are cruel and indifferent relative to sex..
Seduction is something that seizes hold of all pleasures, affects and representations, and gets ahold of dreams themselves
in order to reroute them from their primary course, turning them
into a sharper, more subtle game, whose stakes have neither
an end nor an origin, and concerns neither drives nor desires.

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES

12 5

If sex has a natural law, a pleasure principle, then seduction
consists in denying that principle and replacing it with a rule,
the arbitrary rule of a game. In this sense, seduction is perverse. The immorality of perversion, like that of seduction, does
not come from abandoning oneself to the joys of sex in opposition to all morality ; it results from something more serious
and subtle, the abandonment of sex itself as a referent and a
morality, even in its "joys."
Play, not sensual pleasure. The pervert is cold when it comes
to sex. He transmutes sex and sexuality into a ritual carrier, a
ritual and ceremonial abstraction, a burning concern with signs
rather than an exchange of desires. With the pervert, all the
intensity of sex is dispaced onto the signs and their sequence,
just as in Artaud this intensity is displaced onto the theaterical
unfolding (the savage irruption of signs into reality) . Their violence is ceremonial - and by no means instinctual; only the
rite is violent, only the rules of the game are violent, because
they put an end to the system formed by reality. This is true
cruelty, and has nothing to do with bloodlust. And in this sense,
perversion is cruel .
Perversion's power of fascination comes from a ritual cult
based on rules. The pervert is not someone who transgresses
the law, but someone who eludes the law in order to dedicate
himself to the rule, someone, then, who evades not just the
reproductive finality of the sexual order, but that order itself,
with its symbolic law, in order to link up with a regulated, ritualized, ceremonial form.
Perversion supposes a contract that is not a contract, that is,
a transaction between two free agents, but a pact upholding
the obsevance of a rule. As such it establishes a duel relation
(like a challenge) that excludes all third parties (unlike a contract) and cannot be dissociated into its individual terms. It is
this pact, this duel relation, with its web of obligationsforeign
to the law, which renders perversion invulnerable to the external world - and impenetrable to analysis in terms of the individual unconscious, and thus to psychoanalysis . For the realm
of the rule is not part of psychoanalysis's jurisdiction, which
concerns law alone. Perversion, on the other hand, belongs to
this other universe.

12 6 SEDUCTION

The duel relation abolishes the law of exchange. The rules

of perversion abolish sex's natural law. Arbitrary, like the rules
of a game, the contents are of little consequence ; what is essential is the imposition of a rule or sign, or system of signs,
which abstracts from the sexual order (it might be, as with Klossowski, coins that, oblivious to the natural law of exchange,
become the ritual carrier of perversion).
Hence the affinity between convents, secret societies, Sade's
chateaux, and the universe of perversion . The oaths, the rites,
the interminable Sadian protocols. What joins them together
is a cult of the rule - and not its absence in licentiousness . And
within these rules, the pervert or perverse couple can admit
social strains and distortions without difficulty, since the latter
concern the law alone (thus, according to Goblot, within the
the bourgeois class, one can do anything provided the class rule,
the system of arbitrary signs that defines it as a caste, remains
unharmed) . All transgressions are possible, but not an infraction-of the Rule.
Thus, in their common challenge to the natural order, perversion and seduction resemble each other. But .on numerous
occasions they are violently opposed, as in the story of The
Collector, where a perverse, possessive passion triumphs over
seduction . Or in the story of "The Dancer" related by Leo
Scheer : A concentration camp guard forces a young Jewess to
dance for him before her death. She does so, and as her dancing leaves him spellbound, she is able to approach him, steal
his weapon and kill him. Of the two universes, that of the SS,
exemplifying a staggering, perverse power, a power of fascination (that vested in the sovereignty of the person who holds
a life in his hands), and that of the girl, exemplifying seduction
by the dance, the latter triumphs. Seduction invades the order
of fascination and turns it upside down (though most of the
time it is not even given the chance to enter) . It; is clear here
that the two logics exclude each other, and that each represents
a mortal danger for the other.
But isn't there a continuous cycle of reversion; between the
two? The collector's passion ends up, after all, exercising a kind
of seduction over the girl (or is it only fascination? But, once
again, where's the difference?) . A certain vertigo' results from

SUPERFICIAL ABYSSES 12 7

her desperate attempt to circumscribe a foreclosed universe,
whereby, at the same time, she discloses a sink hole or void
that exercises, by its anti-seduction, a new form of attraction.
A certain kind of seduction is perverse : hysteria, since it uses
seduction to defend itself from seduction. But a certain perversion is seductive, since it uses the detour of perversion to
seduce .
With hysteria seduction becomes obscene. But in certain
forms of pornography, obscenity again becomes seductive. Violence can seduce, and even rape. The odious and the abject can
seduce . Where does the detour of seduction stop? Where does
the cycle of reversion end, and should it be stopped?
However, a profound difference remains : the pervert is radically suspicious of seduction and tries to codify it. He tries to
fix its rules, formalize them in a text, express them in a pact.
In so doing, he breaks a basic rule, that of the secret . Instead
of upholding seduction's supple ceremonial, the pervert wants
a fixed ceremonial, a fixed duel . By making the rule into something sacred and obscene, by designating it as an end, that is
to say, as a law, he traces an uncompromising defense : for it
is the theater of the rule that gains ascendancy, as in hysteria
the theater of the body. More generally, all the perverse forms
of seduction have the following in common: they betray its
secret and the fundamental rule, which is that the rule remain
unspoken .
In this sense, the seducer himself is perverse. For he too
deflects seduction from its rule of secrecy, and does so intentionally. He is to seduction what the cheater is to the game. If
the purpose of the game is to win, then the cheater is the only
true player. If seduction had an objective, then the seducer
would be its ideal figure . But neither seduction nor the game
can be thus characterized, and there is a good chance that what
determines the cheater's actions, his cynical stratagems to win
at all costs, is his hatred of the game, his rejection of the seduction proper to the game - just as there is a good chance that
the seducer's behaviour is determined by his fear of being
seduced, and of having to face the risk of a challenge to his
own truth. This is what leads him to his first sexual conquest,
and then to the countless conquests where he can fetishize his

12 8 SEDUCTION

strategy.
The pervert always gets involved in a maniacal universe of
mastery and the law. He seeks mastery over the fetishized rule
and absolute ritual circumscription . The latter is no longer playful. It no longer moves. It is dead, and can no long put anything into play except its own death . Fetishism is the seduction
of death, including the death of the rule in perversion .
Perversion is a frozen challenge; seduction, a living challenge.
Seduction is shifting and ephemeral; perversion, monotonous
and interminable. Perversion is theatrical and complicit; seduction, secret and reversible.

Systems obsessed with their systematicity are fascinating: they
tune in death as an energy of fascination. Thus the collector's
passion tries to circumscribe and immobilize seduction before
transforming it into a death energy. It is then the flaw of such
systems that becomes seductive. Terror is dissipated by irony.
Or else seduction lies in wait for systems at their point of inertia, that point at which they stop, where there is no longer any
beyond, nor any possible representation - a point of no return
where the trajectories slow down and the object is absorbed
by its own force of resistance and density. What happens in
the environs of this point of inertia? The object is distorted like
the sun refracted by the different layers of the horizon; crushed
by its own mass, it no longer obeys its own laws . We know
almost nothing about such processes of inertia, except that at
the edge of this black hole the point of no return becomes a
point of total reversibility, a catastrophic point where death is
pulled tight to be released in a new seduction effect .

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF
SEDUCTION

V
THE PASSION FOR RULES
No player must be greater than the
game itself

Rollerball

The Diary of the Seducer claims that in seduction the subject is never the master of his master plan, and even when the
latter is deployed in full consciousness, it still submits to the
rules of a game that goes beyond it. A ritual dramaturgy beyond the law, seduction is both game and fate, and as such pushes the protagonists towards their inevitable end without the rule
being broken - for it is the rule that binds them . And the rule's
basic dictum is that the game continue whatever the cost, be
it death itself. There is, then, a sort of passion that binds the
players to the rule that ties them together - without which the
game would not be possible .
Ordinarily we live within the realm of the Law, even when
fantasizing its abolition. Beyond the law we see only its transgression or the lifting of a prohibition. For the discourse of law
and interdiction determines the inverse discourse of transgression and liberation. However, it is not the absence of the law
that is opposed to the law, but the Rule.

The Rule plays on an immanent sequence of arbitrary signs,
while the Law is based on a transcendent sequence of necessary signs. The one concerns cycles, the recurrence of conventional procedures, while the other is an instance based in an
irreversible continuity. The one involves obligations, the other
constraints and prohibitions . Because the Law establishes a line,
it can and must be transgressed . By contrast, it makes no sense

13 2 SEDUCTION

to "transgress" a game's rules; within a cycle's recurrence, there
is no line one can jump (instead, one simply leaves the game).
Because the Law - whether that of the signifier, castration, or
a social interdiction - claims to be the discursive sign of a legal
instance and hidden truth, it results in repression and prohibitions, and thus the division into a manifest and a latent discourse.
Given that the rule is conventional and arbitrary, and has no
hidden truth, it knows neither repression nor the distinction
between the manifest and the latent . It does not carry any meaning, it does not lead anywhere ; by contrast, the Law has a determinate finality. The endless, reversible cycle of the Rule is
opposed to the linear, finalized. progression of the Law.
Signs do not have the same status in the one as in the other.
The Law is part of the world of representation, and is therefore subject to interpretation or decipherment . It involves
decrees or statements, and is not indifferent to the subject. It
is a text, and falls under the influence of meaning and referentiality. By contrast, the Rule has no subject, and the form of
its utterance is of little consequence; one does not decipher
the rules, nor derive pleasure from their comprehension - only
their observance matters, and the resulting giddiness. This also
distinguishes the passion for the game's rituals and intensity from
the pleasure that attaches to obedience to the Law, or its transgression .

In order to understand the intensity of ritual forms, one must
rid oneself of the idea that all happiness derives from nature,
and all pleasure from the satisfaction of a desire. On the contrary, games, the sphere of play, reveal a passion for rules, a giddiness born of rules, and a force that comes from ceremony,
and not desire.
Does the delight one experiences in a game come from a
dream-like situation, where one moves free of reality, but which
one can quit at any time? Not at all. Games, unlike dreams, are
subject to rules, and one just doesn't leave a game. Games create obligations like those found in challenges . To leave a game
is unsportsmanlike. And the fact that one cannot refuse to play

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 13 3

a game from within - a fact that explains its enchantment and
differentiates it from "reality" - creates a symbolic pact which
compels one to observe the rules without reserve, and to pursue the game to the end, as one pursues a challenge to the end.
The order instituted by the game, being conventional, is incommensurable with the necessary order of the real world: it
is neither ethical nor psychological, and its acceptance (the acceptance of the rules) implies neither resignation nor constraint.
As such, there is no freedom in our moral and individual sense
of that term, in games. They are not to be equated with liberty.
Games do not obey the dialectic of free will, that hypothetical
dialectic of the sphere of the real and the law. To enter into a
game is to enter a system of ritual obligations. Its intensity derives from its initiatory form - not from our liberty, as we would
like to believe, following an ideology that sees only a single,
"natural" source of happiness and pleasure.
The game's sole principle, though it is never posed as universal, is that by choosing the rule one is delivered from the law.
Without a psychological or metaphysical foundation, the rule
has no grounding in belief. One neither believes nor disbelieves
a rule - one observes it. The diffuse sphere of belief, the need
for credibility that encompasses the real, is dissolved in the
game. Hence their immorality : to proceed without believing in
it, to sanction a direct fascination with conventional signs and
groundless rules .
Debts too are annuled. In games there is nothing to redeem,
no accounts to settle with the past . For this reason, games appear unaware of the dialectic of the possible and impossible,
there being no accounts to settle with the future . There is nothing "possible," since everything is played, everything decided,
without hope and without alternatives, according to a relentless, unmediated logic. That is why there is no laughter around
the poker table, ,for its logic is cool (but not casual); and the
game being without hope, is never obscene and never lends
itself to laughter. Games are serious, more serious than life, as
seen in the paradoxical fact that in a game lives can be at stake.
Games, therefore, are no more based on the pleasure principle than the reality principle. _They suppose the enchantment
of the rule, and the sphere that the rule describes. And the lat-

13 4 SEDUCTION

ter is not a sphere of illusion or diversion, but involves another
logic, an artificial, initiatory logic wherein the natural determinants of life and death have been abolished. This constitutes
the specificity of games and their stakes . It makes no sense to
reduce them to an economic logic that would speak of conscious investment, or to a logic of desire that would speak of
unconscious motives . Conscious or unconscious - this double determination may be valid for the sphere of .meaning and
law, but not for rules and games.

The Law describes a potentially universal system of meaning and value. It aims at objective recognition . On the basis of
its underlying transcendence, the Law constitutes itself into an
instance for the totalization of the real, with all the revolutions
and transgressions clearing the way to the law's universalization . By contrast, the Rule is immanent to a limited and restricted system, which it describes without transcending, and
within which it is immutable. The rule does not aspire to universality and, strictly speaking, it lacks all exteriority since it does
not institute an internal scission . It is the Law's transcendence
that establishes the irreversibility of meaning and value. And
it is the rule's immanence, its arbitrary, circumscriptive character, that leads, in its own sphere, to the reversibility of meaning
and the reversion of the Law.
The inscription of rules in a sphere without a beyond (it's
no longer a universe, since it no longer aspires to universality)
is as difficult to understand as the idea of a finite universe. A
boundary without something beyond it is unimaginable. For
us the finite is always set against the infinite; but the sphere
of games is neither finite nor infinite - transfinite perhaps. It
has its own finite contours, with which it resists the infinity
of analytic space. To reinvent a rule is to resist the linear infinitude of analytic space in order to recover a reversible space .
For a rule has its own revolution, in the literal sense of the word:
the convection towards a central point and the cycle's reversion (this is how rituals function . within a cyclical world), independent of every logic of cause and effect, origin and end .

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 13 5

This marks the end of the centrifugal dimension: the sudden, intensive gravitation of space and abolition of time, which
implodes in a flash to become so dense that it escapes the traditional laws of physics - its entire course spiraling inwards
towards the center where the density is greatest . This is the
game's fascination, the crystalline passion that erases memory
traces and forfeits meaning. All passion comes close, in its form,
to the latter, but the passion for gaming is the purest .
The best analogy would be with primitive cultures, which
have been described as closed in on themselves, incapable of
conceiving of the rest of the world. But in our society the rest
of the world exists only for us . Their closure, far from being
restrictive, derives from a different logic which, because we are
trapped within the imaginary of the universal, can no longer
conceive of except pejoratively, as limited.
The symbolic sphere of these cultures knows no remains.
In games too, unlike the real, there is nothing left over. Because
they have neither history, memory nor internal accumulation
(the stakes are constantly being consumed and reversed, it being an unspoken rule that, while the game is in progress, one
cannot withdraw anything in the form of a gain or "surplus
value"), they leave no residue within . Nor is there anything that
remains outside the game. The "remainder" supposes an unsolved equation, an unrealized destiny, something subtracted
or repressed. But a game's equation is always perfectly
balanced, and its destiny always fulfilled, without leaving any
traces (something that distinguishes it from the unconscious) .
The theory of the unconscious supposes that certain affects,
scenes or signifiers can no longer be put into play, that they
are foreclosed, outside-the-game. The game, on the other hand,
is based on the hypothesis that everything can be put into play.
Otherwise it would have to be admitted that one has always
already lost, that one is playing in order to always lose . In the
game, however, no objects are wasted . There is nothing irreducible to the game which precedes the game - and in particular,
no previous debts. If within games, something is exorcised, it
is not some debt contracted vis-a-vis the law. It is the Law itself that is exorcised as an unforgivable crime, as discriminatory, an irreconcilable transcendence within the real . And its

13 6 SEDUCTION

transgression only adds a new crime to that of the law - and
new debts and griefs .
The Law establishes equality as a principle: in principle everyone is equal before the Law. By contrast, there is no equality
before the rule ; for the latter has no jurisdiction over principles . Moreover, in order for everyone to be equal they must
be separated. The players, however, are not separate or individualized : they are instituted in a dual and agonistic relation . They
are not even solidary - solidarity supposing a formal conception of the social, the moral ideal of a group in competition .
The players are tied to each other; their parity entails an obligation that does not require solidarity, at least not as something
that needs to be conceptualized or interiorized .
The rule has no need of a formal structure or superstructure
- whether moral or psychological - to function . Precisely because rules are arbitrary and ungrounded, because they have
no referents, they do not require: a consensus, nor any collective will or truth. They exist, that's all. And they exist only when
shared, while the Law floats above scattered individuals.
Their logic is clearly illustrated by what Goblot claims, in
La Barriere et le Niveau, is the cultural rule of castes (and of
the bourgeois class as well) :
1 . Total parity amongst the players within the space
created by the Rule : this is the "level ."
2 . Beyond the Rule, the foreclosing of the rest of the
world : this is the "barrier ."
Within its own domain, extraterritoriality, in the obligations
and privileges, absolute reciprocity: games restore this logic in
its pure state. The agonistic relation between the players can
never jeopardize their reciprocal,, privileged status . The game
might come to naught and its stakes lost - still the reciprocal
enchantment, and the arbitrariness of the Rule at its source, must
be preserved.
This is why duel relations can exclude all effort, merit or personal qualities (above all, in the pure form of games of chance).
Personal traits are admitted only as a kind of favour or enticement, and have no psychological equivalents. This is how games
go - as demanded by the divine transparency of the Rule .
In a finite space, one is delivered from the universal - with

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 13 7

an immediate, duel parity, one is delivered from equality - with
obligations one is delivered from freedom - in the arbitrariness of the Rule and its ceremonial, one is delivered from the
law. Thus the enchantment of games.

In a sense, we are more equal within ceremonials than before the Law (perhaps this accounts for the insistence on politeness, on ceremonial conformity, particularly amongst the less
cultivated classes; it being easier to share conventional signs
than signs laden with meaning or signs of "intelligence"). We
also have more freedom in games than anywhere else, for we
do not have to internalize the rules ; we owe the rules only a
token fidelity, and do not feel we have to transgress them, as
is the case with the law. With the rule we are free of the Law
- and of all the constraints of choice, freedom, responsibility
and meaning! The terrorism of meaning can only be dissipated by arbitrary signs.
However, make no mistake about it: conventional or ritual
signs are binding . One is not free to signify in isolation while
still maintaining a coherent relation with reality or truth . The
freedom demanded by modern signs, like modern individuals,
to articulate themselves according to their affects or desire (for
meaning) does not exist for conventional signs . The latter cannot set off aimlessly, with their own referent or scrap of meaning as ballast. Each sign is tied to others, not within the abstract
structure of language, but within the senseless unfolding of a
ceremonial ; they echo each other and reduplicate themselves
in other, equally arbitrary signs.
The ritual sign is not a representative sign . It is not, therefore, something worth understanding. Instead, it delivers us from
meaning. This is why we are so committed to such signs . The
gaming debt is a debt of honour; everything concerning the
game is sacred because conventional .

In A Lover's Discourse Roland Barthes justifies his choice of

13 8 SEDUCTION

an alphabetical order in the following terms : "to discourage the
temptation of meaning, it was necessary to choose, an absolutely
insignificant order," that is to say, neither an intended order,
nor one of pure chance, but a perfectly conventional order. For
"we must not," he writes, citing a mathematician, "underestimate the power of chance to engender monsters," that is, logical sequences - meaning.
In other words, total liberty, or total indeterminacy are not
opposed to meaning. One can produce meaning simply by playing with chance or disorder. New diagonals of meaning, new
sequences can be engendered from the untamed flood tides
of desire - as in certain modern philosophies, the molecular
or intensive philosophies, which claim to undermine meaning
by diffraction, hook-ups and the Brownian movements of desire.
As with chance, we must not underestimate the power ofdesire
to engender (logical) monsters.
One does not escape meaning by dissociation, disconnection or deterritorialization . One escapes meaning by replacing
it with a more radical simulacrum, a still more conventional
order - like the alphabetical order for Barthes, or the rules of
a game, or the innumerable rituals of everyday life which frustrate both the (political, historical or social) order of meaning
and the disorder (chance) which one would impose on them.
Indeterminacy, dissociation or proliferation in the form of
a star or rhizome only generalize meaning's sphere of influence
to the entire sphere of non-sense. That is, they merely generalize meaning's pure form, an abstract finality with neither a determinate end nor contents . Only rituals abolish meaning.

This is why there are no "rituals of transgression ." The very
expression makes no sense, especially when applied to the festival . The latter has proved very problematic foi our revolutionaries: is the festival a transgression or regeneration of the
Law? An absurd question, for rituals, including the ritual liturgy of the festival, belong to neither the domain of the Law, nor
its transgression, but to that of the Rule.
The same applies to magic. We are constantly interpreting

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 13 9

what falls under the rule in the terms of the law. Thus, magic
is seen as an attempt to outwit the laws of production and hard
work . Primitives have the same "utilitarian" ends as us, but in
order to realize them, they would rather avoid rational exertion . Magic, however, is something very different : it is a ritual
for the maintenance of the world as a play of analogical relations, a cyclical progression where everything is linked together
by their signs. An immense game, rule governs magic, and the
basic problem is to ensure, by means of ritual, that everything
continues to play thus, by analogical contiguity and creeping
seduction. It has nothing to do with linear relations of cause
and effect . The latter - our way of understanding the world
- is objective but unsettled. For it has broken the rule.
Magic does not seek to fool the law. It doesn't cheat - and
to judge it as such is absurd . One might just as well dispute
the arbitrariness of a game's rules in terms of the "objective"
givens of nature.
The same simplistic and objectivistic misunderstanding occurs with gambling . Here the objective would be economic :
to become rich without exerting oneself. The same attempt to
skip steps as in magic. The same transgression of the principle
of equivalence and hard work which rules the "real" world.
The claim, then, is that gambling's truth is to be found in the
tricks it plays on value.
But one is forgetting here the game's power of seduction . Not
just the power one experiences when momentarily carried away,
but the power to transmute values that comes with the rule.
In gambling money is seduced, deflected from its truth. Having been cut off from the law of equivalences (it "burns") and
the law of representation, money is no longer a sign or representation once transformed into a stake. And a stake is not something one invests. As an investment money takes the form of
capital, but as a stake it appears in the form of a challenge. Placing a bet has as little to do with placing an investment, as libidinal investment with the stakes of seduction.
Investments and counter-investments - they belong to the
psychic economy of drives and sex. Games, stakes and
challenges are the figures of passion and seduction. More generally, all the stuff of money, language, sex and affect undergo

14 0 SEDUCTION

a complete change of meaning depending on whether they are
mobilized as an investment or transposed into a stake. The two
moments are irreducible.

If games had a finality, the only true player would be the
cheater. Now, if a certain amount of prestige can be acquired
by transgressing the law, there is no prestige in cheating or transgressing a rule. In truth, the cheater cannot transgress the rules
since the game, not being a system of interdictions, does not
have lines one can cross. One does not "trangress" a rule, one
fails to observe it . And non-observance does not lead to a state
of transgression ; it brings one back under the jurisdiction of
the law.
This is the case with the cheater, who denies or, even better,
profanes the game's ceremonial conventions for economic reasons (or psychological reasons, if he cheats simply for the pleasure of winning), and thereby restores the laws of the real world.
By introducing factors of an individual nature, he destroys the
game's "duel" enchantment . If cheating was once punished by
death and is still condemned strongly, it is because, as a crime,
it resembles incest : cultural rules being broken to the sole profit
of the "laws of nature."
For the cheater, there is no longer anything at stake. He confuses the stakes with surplus-value. But the stakes are what enables one to play, and to turn them into the game's purpose is
to abuse one's position of trust. In a similar manner, the rules
establish the very possibility of playing, the space within which
the sides confront each other. To treat the rules as ends (or as
laws or truths) is to destroy both the game and its stakes. The
rules have no autonomy, that quality which, according to Marx,
characterizes commodities, both individually and in general,
and is the sacrosanct value of the economic domain. The cheater
too is autonomous: he establishes a law, his own law, against
the arbitrary rituals of the rule - this is what disqualifies him .
And he is free - this explains his downfall . Moreover, he is rather
dreary, because he no longer exposes himself to the seduction
of games, because he refuses the vertigo of seduction. By way

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION

141

of hypothesis, one might postulate that personal advantage is
only an alibi: in reality he cheats in order to escape seduction ;
he cheats because he is afraid of being seduced.
The challenge of a game is very different, and games are always a challenge - and not just when played around a table.
Consider the American who had the following classified advertisement printed in the paper: "Send me a dollar!" And then
received tens of thousands of dollars. He did not promise anything - he was not, therefore, swindling anyone. Nor did he
say: "I need a dollar" - nobody would have ever given him
a dollar under such circumstances. Somewhere he had let float
the off-chance of a miraculous exchange . Something more than
an equivalence . A bluff. He was offering the public a challenge. . .
What sort of sublime transaction were they negotiating when,
instead of buying a dollar's worth of ice cream, they sent in
their money? They never really believed they would receive
ten thousand dollars in return . In truth, they took up the
challenge in their own way, and it was as valid as any other,
for they were being offered a wishbone where one wins on
both counts :
One never knows, it might work (ten thousand dollars in the mail), in which case, one has received
a sign of the Gods' favour (which Gods? those who
had printed the ad).
If it doesn't work, it is because the obscure instance
that gave me the sign did not take up my challenge.
So much the better. Psychologically I have beaten the Gods.
A double challenge: the con man challenges the sucker and
the latter challenges fate . If he is overwhelmed by fate, he is
in the clear. One can always count on culpability to look for
ways of being exorcised, but it really isn't a question of guilt.
To send a dollar in response to the absurd challenge of the advertisement, is the sacrificial response par excellence. It can be

14 2

SEDUCTION

summed up as: "There must be something behind this . I will
summon the Gods to respond or else to disappear" - and reducing the Gods to nothing is always a source of pleasure .

Stakes and challenges, summoning and bluffing - there is no
question of belief in all this . Moreover, one never "believes"
in anything. It is never a question of believing or not believing, no more than for Santa Claus. Belief is an absurd concept,
of the same type as motivation, need, instinct, i.e, drive, desire,
and, God knows what else - facile tautologies that hide from
us the fact that our actions are never grounded psychologically in belief, but in stakes and challenges . It is never a matter
of carefully reasoned speculation on existence (on the existence
of God, or of someone with a dollar), but of continual provocation, of a game. One does not believe in God, just as one
does not "believe" in chance -- except in the humdrum discourses of religion or psychology. One challenges them, they
challenge you, one plays with them, and they play with you :
for this one does not have to believe in them .
Thus faith in the religious sphere is similar to seduction in
the game of love. Belief is turned to the existence of God - and
existence has only an impoverished, residual status, being what
is left when all else has been removed - while faith is a challenge
to God's existence, a challenge to God to exist, and in return,
to die. One seduces God with faith, and He cannot but respond,
for seduction, like the challenge, is a reversible form. And He
responds a hundredfold by His grace to the challenge of faith.
As with all ritual exchanges, the whole forms a system of obligations, with God being obliged and even compelled to respond
- even as He is never compelled to exist. Belief is satsified with
asking Him to exist and underwrite the world's existence - it
is the disenchanted, contractual form. But faith turns God into
a stake : God challenges man to exist (and he can respond to
this challenge with his death), and man challenges God to
respond to his sacrifice, that is, to disappear in return .
One always aspires to something more than mere existence,
and something more than an equivalent value - and this some-

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 14 3

thing more, the challenge's immoderation compared to the contract, its intemperance compared to the equivalence of cause
and effect, is clearly the result of seduction - that of games and
magic. If we have experienced this in amorous seduction, why
not in our relations with the world? Symbolic efficacy is not
an empty concept. It reflects the existence of another form of
the circulation of goods and signs, a form far more effective
and powerful than economic circulation . What is fascinating
about a miraculous win at the gaming tables is not the money:
it is the resumption of ties with these other, symbolic circuits
of unmediated and immoderate bidding, which concern the
seduction of the order of things .

In the last analysis, there is nothing to prevent things from
being seduced like beings - one simply has to find the game's
rules.
The entire problem of chance appears here. Magic, as a wager,
is similar to our games of chance. What is at stake is the particle of value thrown in the face of chance considered as a transcendent instance, not in order to win its favours, but to dismiss
its transcendence, its abstraction, and turn it into a partner, an
adversary. The stake is a summons, the game a duel : chance
is summoned to respond, obliged by the player's wager to
declare itself either favourable or hostile. Chance is never neutral, the game tranforms it into a player and agonistic figure .
Which is another way of saying that the basic assumption
behind the game is that chance does not exist .
Chance in its modern, rational sense, chance as an aleatory
mechanism, pure probability subjected to the laws of probability (and not to the rules of a game) - a sort of Great Neutral
Aleatorium (G.N.A.), the epitome of a fluctuating universe dominated by statistical abstractions, a secularized, disenchanted and
unbound divinity. This kind of chance does not exist in games;
they exist to ward it off. Games of chance deny that the world
is arranged contingently ; on the contrary they seek to override
any such neutral order and recreate a ritual order of obligations
which undermines the free world of equivalences . In this manner games are radically opposed to the economy and Law. They
question the reality of chance as an objective law and replace
it with an inter-connected, propitious, duel, agonistic and non-

144

SEDUCTION

contingent universe - a charmed universe (charmed, in the
strong sense of the term), a universe of seduction.
Thus the superstitious manipulations surrounding games,
which many (Caillois) view only in terms of debasement . The
resort to magical practices, from playing one's birth date to looking for recurrent series (the eleven came up eleven times running in Monte Carlo), from the most subtle winning formulas
to the rabbit's foot in one's coat pocket, they all feed on the
idea that chance does not exist, that the world is built of networks of symbolic relations - not contingent connections, but
webs of obligation, webs of seduction. One has only to play
one's hand right. . .
The bettor defends himself at all costs from the' idea of a neutral universe, of which objective chance is a part . The bettor
claims that anything can be seduced - numbers, letters, or the
laws that govern their distribution . He would seduce the Law
itself. The least sign, the least gesture has a meaning, which
is not to say that it is part of some rational progression, but
that every sign is vulnerable to, and can be seduced by other
signs. The world is held together by unbreakable chains, but
they are not those of the Law.
Here lies the "immorality" of games, often attributed to the
fact that they encourage one to want to win too much too quickly. But this is to give them too much credit . Games are more
immoral than that . They are immoral because they substitute
an order of seduction for an order of production .

If a game is a venture for the seduction ofchance that attaches
itself to combinations of signs (but not those of,cause and effect, nor those of contingent series) and if games tend to
eliminate the objective neutrality of chance and its statistical
"liberty" by harnessing them to the form of the duel, the
challenge, and orderly bidding -- then it is absurd to imagine,
as does Gilles Deleuze in Logique du Sens, an "ideal game" that
would consist of a fury of contingencies and, thus, of a radically increased indeterminacy which, in turn, would give rise
to the simultaneous play of every series and, therefore, to the

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 14 5
radical expression of becoming and desire.
The probability that two sequences will never - or hardly
ever - cross eliminates the game's very possibility (ifsequences
never cross one cannot even speak of chance). But so does the
likelihood that an indefinite number of sequences will cross
each other at any given moment . For games are only conceived
from the junction of a few sequences within a time-space frame
limited by rules. Indeed, the latter is a condition for the production of chance ; the rules do not restrict the freedom of a "total" chance, but constitute the very mode of the game's
appearance.
It is not the case that the "more" chance there is, the more
intense the -game . This is to conceptualize both games and
chance in terms of a sort of "freedom" of combination, an immanent drifting, a constant dissociation of orders and sequences,
an unbridled improvisation of desire - a kind of daimon who
blows in all directions, breathing a little uncertainty, an additional incidence into the world's orderly economy.
Now all this is absurd . Becoming is not a matter of more or
less . There is no dose or overdose . Either the world is engaged
in a cycle of becoming, and is so engaged at all times, or it is
not. At any rate, it makes no sense to "take the side" of becoming, assuming it exists - no more than that of chance, or desire.
For one has no choice : "To take the side of the primary process
is still a consequence of secondary processes" (Lyotard).
The very idea that games can be intensified by the acceleration of chance (as though one were speaking of the acidic content of a chemical solution), the idea that becoming can thereby
be extended exponentially, turns chance into an energizing function, and stems directly from a confusion with the notion of
desire. But this is not chance. Perhaps one should even admit,
as the bettor secretly postulates, that chance does not exist.
Quite a number of cultures have neither the word nor the concept, for they do not view anything in terms of contingency,
nor even in terms ofprobability. Only our culture has invented the possibility of a statistical response, an inorganic, objective and fluctuating response, the dead response of the
phenomena's objective indeterminacy and instability. When one
thinks about it, the assumption of a contingent universe,

146 SEDUCTION

stripped of all obligations and purged of every symbolic or formal. rule, the idea that the world of things is subjected to a
molecular and objective disorder - the same disorder that is
idealized and glorified in the molecular vision of desire - this
assumption is insane . Scarcely less demented than the assumption of an objective order, of an unbroken chain of cause and
effect, which belongs to the glory days of classical reason, and
from which, furthermore, the assumption of disorder follows
in accord with the logic of residues.
The idea of chance first emerged as the residue of a logical
order of determination . But even hypostasized as a revolutionary variable, it still remains the mirror image of; the principle
of causality. Its generalization, its unconditional "liberation,"
as in Deleuze's "ideal game," is part of the political and mystical economy of residues at work everywhere today, with its
structural inversion of weak into strong terms. Chance, once
perceived as obscene and insignificant, is to be'revived in its
insignificance and so become the motto of a nomadic economy of desire.

Games are not to be confused with "becoming," they are not
nomadic, and do not belong to the realm of desire . They are
characterized, even when games of chance, by their capacity
to reproduce a given arbitrary constellation in the same terms
an indefinite number of times. Their true form is cyclical or
recurrent. And as such they, and they alone, put a definite stop
to causality and its principle - not by the massive introduction
of random series (which results only in the dispersal of causality, its reduction to scattered fragments, and not its overcoming) - but by the potential return (the eternal return if one will)
to an orderly, conventional situation.
Neither the temporality of desire and its "freedom," nor that
of some natural development (as with the play of children, or
the play of the world described by Heraclitus), but that of the
eternal return of a ritual form - and willed as such . Thus each
of the game's sequences delivers us from the linearity of life
and death.

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 14 7

There are two kinds of eternal return . The statistical kind neutral, objective and insipid - where, given that the combinations, however numerous, in a finite system cannot be infinite,
probability demands that the same arrangement eventually
recur, according to an immense cycle. A thin metaphysics: it
is a natural eternal return, in accord with a natural, statistical
causality. The other vision is tragic and ritual : it is the willed
recurrence, as in games, of an arbitrary and non-causal configuration of signs, where each sign seeks out the next relentlessly, as in the course of a ceremonial . It is the eternal return
demanded by rules - as in a mandatory succession of throws
and wagers . And it makes no difference whether they be the
rules of the game of the universe itself: there is no metaphysics looming on the horizon of the game's indefinitely reversible cycle - and certainly not the metaphysics of desire, which
is still dependent on the world's natural order, or natural
disorder.
Desire may well be the Law of the universe, but the eternal
return is its rule . Luckily for us - otherwise, where would be
the pleasure in playing?

The consummate vertigo induced by a game: when the throw
of the dice ends up "eliminating chance," when, for example,
the same number appears against all odds several times in a row.
A game's ultimate fantasy, the ecstasy of checking chance when, in the grip of a challenge, the same throw is repeated,
the prisoner of a recurring series, and as a result the law and
chance are abolished. One plays in anticipation of this symbolic transcursion, that is to say, in anticipation of an event that
will put an end to a random process without, however, falling prey to an objective law . By itself each throw produces

only a moderate giddiness, but when fate raises the bid - a sign
that it is truly caught up in the game - when fate itself seems
to throw a challenge to the natural order of things and enters
into a frenzy or ritual vertigo, then the passions are unleashed
and the spirits seized by a truly deadly fascination .
There is nothing imaginary about this, but an imperious

148 SEDUCTION

necessity to put a stop to the natural play of differences as well
as the historical development of the law. There is no greater
moment. The only way to respond to the natural advances of
desire is in terms of the ritual one-upmanship of seduction and
games; and the only way to respond to the contractual proposals
of the law is in terms of the one-upmanship and formal vertigo
of rules. A crystalline passion without equal.

Games do not belong to the realm of fantasy, and their recurrence is not the repetition of a phantasy. The latter proceeds
from an-"other" scene, and is a figure of death. The game's recurrence proceeds from a rule, and is a figure of seduction and
pleasure . Every repetitive figure of meaning, whether affect or
representation, is a figure of death . Pleasure is released only
by a meaningless recurrence, one that proceeds from neither
a conscious order nor an unconscious disorder, but results from
the reversion and reiteration of a pure form that challenges and
outdoes the law of contents and their accumulation .
The game's recurrence proceeds directly from fate, and exists as fate . Not as a death drive or tendential lowering of the
rate of difference, resulting in the entropic twilights of systems
of meaning, but as a form of ritual incantation - a form of
ceremonial where the signs, because they are so violently attracted to each other, no longer leave any room for meaning,
and can only duplicate themselves . Here too one finds the vertigo of seduction, the vertigo that comes of being absorbed in
a recurrent fate . All societies other than our own are familiar
with this theater of ritual, which is also a theater of cruelty.
Games rediscover something of this cruelty. Compared with
games, everything real is sentimental . The truth,, and the Law
itself are sentimental relative to the pure forms of repetition .
Just as it is not liberty that is opposed to the law, but the rule,
similarly it is not indeterminacy that is opposed ; to causality,
but obligation. The latter is neither a linear chain, nor an unchaining (which is merely the rornanticism of a deranged causality); it forms a reversible chain that, moving from sign to sign,
inexorably completes its cycle, turning its origin into an ellipse

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 14 9

and economizing on its end, like the shells and bracelets in Polynesian exchange relationships . The cycle of obligations is not
a code. We have confused obligation in the strong sense, in its
timeless, ritual sense, with laws and codes, and their commonplace constraints, which rule over us under the opposite sign,
that of liberty.
In Deleuze's pure, nomadic chance, in his "ideal game," there
is only disjunction and dispersed causality. But only a conceptual error allows one to dissociate the game from its rules in
order to radicalize its utopian form. And the same intemperance, or the same facility, allows one to dissociate chance from
what defines it - an objective calculus of series and probabilities - in order to turn it into the theme song for an ideal indeterminacy, an ideal desire composed of the endless
occurrence of countless series . But why more series? Why not
a pure Brownian movement? But then the latter, though it seems
to have become the physical model for radical desire, has its
laws, and is not a game.
To generalize chance, in the form of an "ideal game," without
simultaneously generalizing the game's rules, is akin to the fantasy of radicalizing desire by ridding it of every law and every
lack . The objective idealism of the "ideal game," and the subjective idealism of desire .

A game forms a system with neither contradiction nor internal negativity. That is why one cannot laugh at it. And if it cannot be parodied, it is because its entire organization is parodic.
The rule functions as the parodic simulacrum of the law. Neither
an inversion nor subverion of the law, but its reversion in simulation . The pleasure of the game is twofold: the invalidation
of time and space within the enchanted sphere of an indestructible form of reciprocity - pure seduction - and the parodying
of reality, the formal outbidding of the law's constraints.
Can one produce a finer parody of the ethics of value than
by submitting oneself, with all the intransigence of virtue, to
the outcomes of chance or the absurdity of a rule? Can there
be a finer parody of the values of work, economy, production

15 0

SEDUCTION

and calculation than the challenge and the wager, or the fantastic non-equivalence between what is at stake and what might
be won (or lost - both being equally immoral)? Or' a finer parody
of every idea of contract and exchange than this magical complicity, this "duel" obligation relative to the rules, this agonistic attempt to seduce one's opponent, and to seduce chance
itself? What better denial of the values of will, responsibility,
equality and justice than this exaltation of (good and bad) luck,
this exultation in playing with fate as an equal? Can there be
a more beautiful parody of our ideologies of liberty than this
passion for rules?
Is there a better parody of "sociality" itself than that found
in Borges' fable, "The Lottery in Babylon," with its inescapable and fateful logic and its simulation of the social by the game?

"I come from a dizzy land where the lottery is the basis of
reality." Thus begins a story about a society where the lottery
has swallowed up all the other institutions . In the beginning
it was only a game of plebeian character, and the most one could
do was win. But "the-lotteries" were boring, since "they were
not directed at all of man's faculties, but only at hope ." One
then "tried a reform : the interpolation of a few unfavourable
tickets in the list of favourable numbers" - with the risk of paying a considerable fine. This was a radical modification : it eliminated the illusion that the game had an economic purpose.
Henceforth one entered a pure game, and the dizziness that
seized hold of Babylonian society knew no limits . Anything
could happen by drawing lots, the lottery became "secret, free
and general," "every free man automatically participated in the
sacred drawings which took place every sixty nights and which
determined his destiny until the next drawing." A lucky draw
could make him a rich man or a magi, or give him the women
he desired; an unlucky draw could bring him mutilation or
death .
In short, the interpolation of chance in all the interstices of
the social order and "in the order of the world." All the lottery's errors were good, since they only intensified its logic.

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION

15 1

Impostures, ruses, and manipulation could be perfectly integrated into the aleatory system : who could say if they were "real,"
that is, whether they were the result of some natural or rational causality, or resulted from chance as determined by the lottery? In principle no one. Predestination encompassed
everything, the lottery's effects were universal. The Lottery and
the Company could cease to exist, their silent functioning would
be exercised over a field of total simulation . All "reality" had
entered the secret decisions of the Company, and there was,
in all likelihood, no longer any difference between the real reality and the contingent reality.
Indeed it is possible that the Company never existed, and
the world's order would remain the same . But the assumption
of its existence changes everything . The assumption alone is
enough to change reality, as it is, as it cannot be otherwise, into
one immense simulacrum . Reality is nothing other than its own
simulation.
In our "realist" societies, the Company has ceased to exist.
Our societies are oblivious to and built on the ruins of this possible total simulation. We are no longer conscious of the spiral
of simulation thatpreceded reality. In truth, our unconscious
is found here : in our incomprehension before the vertiginous
indetermination and simulation that rules the sacred disorder
of our lives . Not in the repression of a few affects or representations - our insipid conception of the unconscious - but in
our blindness before the Big Game, before the fact that our
"real" fate with all its "real" events has already passed through,
not some anterior life (though by itself this hypothesis is superior to our metaphysics of objective causes), but a cycle of
indetermination, a game cycle that is simultaneously arbitrary
and fixed. Borges' Lottery is the symbolic incarnation of this
game, which has given our fate that hallucinatory quality we
take for its truth. The logic escapes us, though our consciousness of the real is based on our unconsciousness of simulation .
Remember the Babylonian Lottery. Whether or not it exists,
the veil of indetermination it throws over our life is absolute .
Its arbitrary decrees rule the least details of our existence. We
dare not speak of a hidden infrastructure, for the latter will eventually be called upon to appear as truth - while here it is a mat-

15 2

SEDUCTION

ter of fate, that is, of a game that has always already been worked
out, yet remains forever indecipherable .
Borges' originality is to have extended this game to the entire social structure. Where we see games as superstructure, as
relatively weightless compared to the good, solid infrastructure
of social relations, he has turned . the entire edifice upside down
and made indetermination into the determinant instance. It is
no longer economic reason, that of labour and history, nor the
"scientific" determinism of exchanges which determines the
social structure and fate of individuals, but a total indeterminism,
that of the Game and of Chance. Predestination coincides here
with a total mobility, and an arbitrary system with the most radical democracy (the instantaneous exchange of all positions something to satisfy the present-day's thirst for polyvalence) .
This reversal is extremely ironic relative to every contract,
every rational foundation of the social . Pacts concerning rules,
and concerning their arbitrariness (the Lottery)' eliminate the
social as we understand it, just as rituals put an end to the law.
It has never been otherwise with secret societies; in their efflorescence one should see a resistance to the social .
The nostalgia for a pactual, ritual, and contingent sociality,
the yearning to be free of the contract and social relation, the
longing for a crueler if more fascinating destiny for exchange,
is deeper than the rational imperatives of the social with which
we have been lulled . Borges' take is perhaps not a fiction, but
a description that comes close to our former dreams, that is
to say, to our future as well .
In Byzantium, social life, the political order, its hierarchies
and expenditures were regulated. by horse races. Today one still
bets on the horses, but the mirror of democracy produces only
a faint reflection . The enormous amount of money exchanged
in betting is nothing compared to the extravagance of the Byzantines, where all public life was tied to equestrian competitions .
Still it is symptomatic of the game's importance in many social
activities and in the rapid circulation of goods and social positions. In Brazil there is the Jogo de Bicho: betting, lotteries and
other games have seized hold of entire sectors of the population who risk their life's savings and status . A distraction from
underdevelopment one might claim, but even in its wretched

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 15 3

modern version, it provides an echo of cultures where ludic
and sumptuary practices generated the essential forms and structures of exchange - a schema that goes very much against the
grain of our own culture, most notably in its Marxist version.
Underdeveloped? Only the privileged, those elevated by the
social contract, or by their social status - itself only a
simulacrum, and one without even the value of a destiny - can
judge such aleatory practices as worthless when they are quite
superior to their own . For it is as much a challenge to the social as to chance, and indicative of a yearning for a more adventurous world, where one plays with value more recklessly.

THE DUAL, THE POLAR AND THE DIGITAL
A lottery is a simulacrum - there being nothing more artificial than to regulate the course of events by the absurd decrees
of chance . But let us not forget that this is what antiquity did
with the arts of divination, using the entrails of chickens and
the flight of birds; and isn't it what the modern art of interpretation continues to do, though with fewer grounds? It is all a
simulacrum . The difference is that in Borges' Ficciones the
game's rules completely replace the law and the game decides
one's destiny, while in our society games are simply marginal
and frivolous diversions .
Compared to Borges' fictional society, based on chance
decrees and a type of predestination by the game, relative to
such a cruel order where the risks are never-ending and the
stakes absolute, we live in a society of minimal stakes and risks.
Ifthe terms were not contradictory, one could say that security has become our destiny. It might be the case, moreover, that
this outcome will be fatal for our society - the mortality of overprotected species which, in their domestication, are dying of
too much security.
Now if the Babylonians succumbed to the lottery's vertigo,
it was because there was something in the lottery that completely seduced them, that enabled them to challenge everything worth existing, including their own existence - and their

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 15 5

own death. By contrast, for us the social is without seduction.
What is less seductive than the very idea of the social? The
degree zero of seduction. Even God never fell so low.
Relative to the dangers of seduction that haunt the universe
of games and rituals, our own sociality and the forms of communication and exchange it institutes, appear in direct proportion to their secularization under the sign of the Law, as
extremely impoverished, banal and abstract .
But this is still only an intermediary state, for the age of the
Law has passed, and with it that of the socius and the social
contract . Not only are we no longer living in an era of rules
and rituals, we are no longer living in an era of laws and contracts . We live today according to Norms and Models, and we
do not even have a term to designate that which is replacing
sociality and the social .
the RULE
Ritual(ity)

the LAW
Social(ity)

the NORM
????????

We are presently living with a minimum of real sociality and
a maximum of simulation . Simulation neutralizes the poles that
organize the perspectival space of the real and the Law, while
draining off the energy potential that still drives the space of
the Law and the social . In the era of models, one must speak
of the deterrence of the antagonistic strategies that gave the Law
and the social their stakes - including a stake in their transgression . No more transgression, and no more transcendence. But
for all that, we are no longer in the tragic immanence of rules
and rituals, but in the cool immanence of norms and models.
Deterrence, regulation, feed-back, sequences of tactical elements
in a non-referential space. . . But above all, in this age of models,
the digitality of the signal as a replacement for the polarity of
the sign .
DUALITY

POLARITY

DIGITALITY

These three logics are exclusive of each other:
- the dual relation dominates the game, the ritual and the entire sphere of the rule.

156

SEDUCTION

the polar relation, or the dialectical or contradictory relation, organizes the universe of the Law, the social, and meaning.
- the digital relation (but it is no longer a "relation" - let us
speak instead of the digital connection) allocates the space of
Norms and Models.
In the cross-play of these three logics, the concept of seduction in its radical sense (as duel, ritualistic, agonistic, with the
stakes maximized) must be replaced by seduction in its "soft"
sense - the seduction of an "ambience," or the playful eroticization of a universe without stakes .
-

V
THE "LUDIC" AND COLD SEDUCTION
For we are living off seduction
but will die in fascination.

The play of models with their ever-changing combinations,
is characteristic of a ludic universe, where everything operates
as possible simulation, where everything, in the absence of a
God to acknowledge his creations, can act as counter-evidence .
Subversive values have only to wait their turn, and violence and
critique are themselves presented as models. We are living in
a supple, curved universe, that no longer has any vanishing
points. Formerly the reality principle was defined in terms of
the coherence of objects and their use, functions and their institution, things and their objective determination - today the
pleasure principle is defined in terms of the conjunction of
desires and models (of a demand and its anticipation by simulated responses) .
The "ludic" is formed of the "play" of the model with the
demand. But given that the demand is prompted by the model,
and the model's precession is absolute, challenges are impossible. Most of our exchanges are regulated by game strategies ;
but the latter, defined as a capacity to foresee all of one's opponent's moves and check them in advance, renders all stakes impossible. Game theory describes the ludic character of a world

15 8

SEDUCTION

where, paradoxically, nothing is at stake.
The "Werbung," the solicitation of advertisements and polls,
all the models of the media and. politics, no longer claim credence, only credibility. They are no longer objects of libidinal
investment ; for they are made selectively available within a range
of choices - with leisure itself now appearing, relative to work,
as just another channel on the screen of time (and will there
soon be a third or fourth channel?). American television, one
might add, with its 83 channels is the living incarnation of the
ludic : one can no longer do anything but play - change channels, mix programs and create one's own montage (the
predominance of TV games is merely an echo, at the level of
content, of this ludic employment of the medium). And like
every combinatorial, it is a source of fascination'. But one can
no longer speak of a sphere of enchantment or seduction; instead, an era of fascination is beginning .
Obviously, the ludic cannot be equated with having fun. With
its propensity for making connections, the ludic, is more akin
to detective work . More generally, it connotes networks and
their mode of functioning, the forms of their permeation and
manipulation . The ludic encompasses all the different ways one
can "play" with networks, not in order to establish alternatives,
but to discover their state of optimal functioning.
We have already witnessed the debasement of play to the level
of function - in play therapy, play school, play-as=catharsis and
play-as-creativity . Throughout the fields of education and child
psychology, play has become a "vital function" 'or necessary
phase of development. Or else it has been grafted onto the pleasure principle to become a revolutionary alternative, a dialectical overcoming of the reality principle in Marcuse, an ideology
of play and the festival for others . But even as transgression,
spontaneity, or aesthetic disinterestedness, play remains only
a sublimated form of the old, directive pedagogy that gives it
a meaning, assigns it an end, and thereby purges it of its power
of seduction. Play as dreaming, sport, work, rest or as a transitional object - or as the physical hygiene necessary for psychological equilibrium or for a system's regulation or evolution .
The very opposite of that passion for illusion which once
characterized it .

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 15 9

We are still speaking, however, offunctional attempts to subject play to the law of value. What is more serious is the cybernetic absorption of play into the general category of the ludic.

The general evolution of games is revealing: from competitive games - team sports, old-fashioned card games, or even
table football - to the generation of pinball machines (which
already had screens but were not yet "televised," a mixture of
electronics and hand movements), now rendered obsolete by
electronic tennis and other computerized games, their screens
streaked with high-speed molecules. And the atomistic manipulation required by the latter is not to be distinguished from the
practices of information control in the "labour process" or the
future employment of computers in the domestic sphere, which
were also preceded by television and other audiovisual aids .
The ludic is everywhere, even in the "choice" of a brand of
laundry detergent in the supermarket. Without too much effort one sees similarities with the world of psychotropic drugs:
for the latter too is ludic, being nothing but the manipulation
of a sensorial keyboard or neuronic instrument panel. Electronic
games are a soft drug - one plays them with the same somnambular absence and tactile euphoria.
Even the genetic code appears as a command keyboard for
the living, on which are played the infinitesimal combinations
and variations that determine their "destiny" - a- "tele"-onomic
destiny that unfolds on the molecular screen of the code. Much
can be said about the objectivity of the genetic code that serves
as a "biological" prototype for the entire universe, this combinatory, aleatory and ludic universe that now surrounds us .
After all, what is "biology"? What is this truth it possesses? Or
is it that it possesses only truth . . . destiny transformed into an
operational instrument panel. Behind the screen of biological
remote control, there is no longer any play - no stakes, illusions, or representations . It is simply a matter of modulating
the code, playing with it as one plays with the tonalities and
timbres of a stereophonic system .
The latter is a good example of the ludic. When manipulat-

160 SEDUCTION

ing the stereo's controls, one's concerns are no longer musical
but technological: the optimal rnodulation of .the system's range.
With the magic of the console and instrument panel, the
manipulation of the medium predominates .
Consider a game of computer chess. Where is the intensity
of the game of chess, or the pleasure proper to computers? The
one involves play, the other the ludic. The same applies to a
soccer match that has been televised . Don't think that they are
the same match: one is hot, the other cool - one is a game,
with its emotional charge, its bravado and choreography, the
other is tactile, modulated (play-backs, close-ups, sweeps, slow
motion shots, different angles of vision, etc.).,The televised
match is, above all else, a televised event, like the Holocaust
or the war in Vietnam, and is barely distinguishable from the
latter. Thus the introduction of colour television in the United
States, which had been slow and difficult, only took off when
one of the major networks decided to introduce colour to televised journalism. It was the period of the war in Vietnam, and
studies have shown that the "play" of colours, and the technical sophistication borne by this innovation, rendered the images of war more bearable to the viewing public . The "more"
truth, the greater the ludic distantiation from the event .

The Holocaust, the television special.
TheJews are no longer forced to pass through the gas chambers and crematorium ovens, but through the sound track and
picture strip, the cathodic screen and microprocessor. The
amnesia, the oblivion, thereby finally attains an aesthetic dimension - consummated in retrospective and retrogressive fashion,
raised here to mass dimensions . Television as the event's true
"final solution ."
The dimension of history that once remained in the shadows
as guilt, no longer exists, since now "the whole world knows,"
the whole world has been shaken - a sure sign that "it" will
never happen again. In effect, what is exorcized at the cost of
only a few tears will not happen again, because it, is now recurring, and in the very form of its alleged denunciation, the very

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION

16 1

medium of its alleged exorcism - television. The same forgetfulness, the same liquidation, extermination, and even annihilation of memory and history - the same recessive irradiation,
the same echoless absorption, the same black hole as Auschwitz . And one would have us believe that television is going
to release us from the burden of Auschwitz by raising collective consciousness, when television perpetuates it in other ways,
no longer under the auspices of a place of annihilation, but of
a medium of dissuasion .
The Holocaust is,first of all (and exclusively) a televised event
(one must not forget McLuhan's basic rule). That is, it is an attempt to reheat a tragic but cold historical event, the first great
event of the cold systems, the-cooling systems, the systems of
dissuasion and extermination which would then be deployed
in other forms (including the Cold War, etc.) - and an event
that concerns cold masses (the Jews no longer implicated, but
in the end forced to manage their own death, the masses no
longer rebellious - dissuaded by death, dissuaded unto death) .
A cold event warmed up by a cold medium for masses, themselves cold, who are going to experience only a posthumous
emotion, a tactile and dissuasive shudder that will enable them
to let the catastrophe slip into oblivion with a sort of aesthetic
good conscience.
In order to reheat all this, the political and pedagogical orchestration that followed the (televised) event in an attempt to give
it meaning was not excessive. The panic before the program's
possible consequences on the minds of children; all those social
workers mobilized to filter it, as ifthis artificial resurrection carried
a danger of contagion! In fact, the danger was quite the opposite: that resulting from the social inertia of cold systems - cold
producing cold . Thus the whole world had to be mobilized in
order to reconstitute the social (warmth) of communication out
of the cold monster of extermination. The program served to
capture the artificial warmth of a dead event in order to reheat
the dead body of the social . Hence the supplementary contributions of the other media attempting to extend the program's
effects by its feed-back: the concurrent polls seconding the program's enormous, collective impact - when, needless to say, these
polls only verified the televisual success of the medium itself.

16 2 SEDUCTION

One should speak of television's cold light, and why it is inoffensive to the imagination (including the imagination of children). It is innocuous because it no longer conveys an imaginary,
for the simple reason that it is no longer an image. Here it contrasts with the cinema which (though increasingly contaminated
by television) is still endowed with an intense imaginary - because it is an image. This is not simply to speak of film as a
mere screen or visual form, but as a myth, something that still
resembles a double, a mirror, a fantasy, a dream, etc. None of
this in the TV image. It doesn't suggest anything, it mesmerizes. . . It is only a screen or, better, it is a miniaturized terminal
that immediately appears in your head (you are the screen and
the television is watching you), transistorizes all, your neurons
and passes for a magnetic tape - a tape, not an image.

All this belongs to the ludic realm where one encounters a

cold seduction - the "narcissistic" spell of electronic and in-

formation systems, the cold attraction of the terminals and mediums that we have become, surrounded as we are by consoles,
isolated and seduced by their manipulation .
The possiblity of modulations within an undifferentiated
universe and of the "play" of unstable sets of elements, is never
without fascination. It is even highly possible that ludic and
libinal flirt with each other somewhere in the direction of random systems, by virtue of a desire that no longer leads to infractions in the legal sense, but entails diffraction in all senses
within a universe that no longer knows the legal sphere. This
desire also belongs to the ludic realm with its topology of shifting systems, and is an added source ofpleasure (or anguish)
for each of the particles moving within the networks . We are
all accorded this light, psychedelic giddiness which results from
multiple or successive connections and disconnections . We are
all invited to become miniaturized "game systems," i .e.,
microsystems with the potential to regulate their own random
functioning.

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION

163

This is the modern meaning of play, the "ludic" sense, connoting the suppleness and polyvalence of combinations . Understood in this sense, "play," its very possibility, is at the basis
of the metastability of systems. It has nothing to do with play
as a dual or agonistic relation ; it is the cold seduction that
governs the spheres of information and communication. And
it is in this cold seduction that the social and its representations are now wearing themselves thin .
We are all quite familiar with this immense process of simulation . Non-directive interviews, call-in shows, all-out participation - the extortion of speech : "It concerns you, you are the
majority, you are what's happening." And the probing of opinions, hearts, minds, and the unconscious to show how much
"it" speaks . The news has been invaded by this phantom content, this homeophathic transplant, this waking dream of communication . A circular construction where one presents the
audience with what it wants, an integrated circuit of perpetual
solicitation . The immense energies spent in maintaining this
simulacrum at arm's length, to avoid the brutal dis-simulation
that would occur should the reality of a radical loss of meaning become too evident.
Seduction /simulacrum: communication as the functioning
of the social within a closed circuit, where signs duplicate an
undiscoverable reality. The social contract has become a "simulation pact" sealed by the media and the news . And nobody,
one might add, is completely taken in: the news is experienced
as an ambience, a service, or hologram of the social . The masses respond to the simulation of meaning with a kind of reverse
simulation; they respond to dissuasion with disaffection, and
to illusions with an enigmatic belief . It all moves around, and
can give the impression of an operative seduction. But such
seduction has no more meaning than anything else, seduction
here connotes only a kind of ludic adhesion to simulated pieces
of information, a kind of tactile attraction maintained by the
models.

164

SEDUCTION

"Tele-phathics ."
"Rogers here - I am receiving you five on five." "Do you hear
me? Yes, I hear you." ."We receive you, come in." "Yes, we are
speaking ." This is the litany of the radio bands, particularly the
alternative or pirate stations . One plays at speaking and listening; one plays at communication using the most sophisticated
technology for the latter's mise en scene. The phatic function
of language, used to establish contact and sustain speech's formal dimension: this function first isolated and described by
Malinowski with reference to the Melanesians, then by Jakobson in his grid of language's functions, becomes hypertrophied
in the tele-dimension of the communications networks . Contact for contact's sake becomes the empty form with which language seduces itself when it no longer has anything to say.
The latter concerns our own culture. What Malinowski
described was something quite different: a symbolic altercation
or duel of words. By these ritual phrases and palavers without
content, the natives were still throwing a challenge and offering a gift, as in a pure ceremonial . Language has no need for
"contact" : it is we who need communication to have a specific
"contact" function, precisely because it is eluding us. That is
why Jakobson was able to isolate it in his analysis of language,
while both the concept and the terms to express it are absent
from other cultures . Jakobson's grid and his axiomatics of communication are contemporaneous with a change in language's
fortune - it is beginning to no longer communicate anything .
It has thus become urgent to analytically restore the functional possibility of communication, and in particular the "phatic"
function that, in logical terms, is a simple truism : if it speaks,
then it speaks . But in effect it no longer speaks, 'and the discovery of the "phatic" function is symptomatic of the need to
inject contact, establish connections, and speak tirelessly simply in order to render language possible . A desperate situation
where even simple contact appears wondrous .
If the phatic has become hypertrophied in all our communications systems (i.e., within the media and information processing systems), it is because tele-distance ensures that speech
literally no longer has any meaning. One says that one is speaking, but by speaking one is only verifying the network and the

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 16 5

fact that one is linked up with it. There is not even an "other"
at the other end, for in a simple reciprocation of signals of recognition there is no longer an identifiable transmitter or receiver,
but simply two terminals. The one terminal's signal to the other
is merely an indication that something is going through and
that, therefore, nothing is happening. Perfect dissuasion .
Two terminals do not two interlocutors make. In "tele" space
(the following also holds true for television), there are no longer
any determinate terms or positions. Only terminals in a position of ex-termination . It is here, morever, that Jakobson's entire grid falls apart, for its validity is restricted to the classic
configuration of discourse and communication. The grid loses
its meaning when applied to networks where pure "digitality"
reigns. In discourse there is still a polarity of terms, distinctive
oppositions that regulate the advent of meaning. A structure,
syntax and space of difference, still regulate dialogue, as implied by the sign (signifier /signified) and the message (transmitter/receiver), etc. But the 0/1 of binary or digital systems
is no longer a distinctive opposition or established difference.
It is a "bit," the smallest unit of electronic impulse - no longer
a unit of meaning, but an identificatory pulse. It is no longer
language, but its radical dissuasion . This is what the matrix of
information and communication is like, and how the networks
function . The need for "contact" is most cruelly felt, for not
only is there no duel relation as with the Melanesian's linguistic potlach, but there is no longer even the inter-individual logic
of exchange found in classical language (that of Jakobson). Discursive duality and polarity have been succeeded by the digitality of data processing. The total ascendancy of the media and
networks . The cold elevation of the electronic media, and of
the mass itself as medium.
TELE : there are no longer anything but terminals. AUTO : each
person is his or her own terminal . (`Tele" and "auto" can themselves be seen as working pieces or commuting particles that
are connected to words, like a video is connected to a group
of people, or television to those watching it). The group with
a video camera is itself its own terminal . It records, adjusts and
manages itself electronically. It turns itself on, seduces itself .
The group is seduced and even eroticized by the instantane-

166 SEDUCTION
ous report it has of itself. Soon self-management will be universal, the province of every person, group and terminal . Selfseduction will become the norm of all the charged particles
in the networks or systems.
The body itself, operated by remote control from the genetic code, is itself no more than its own terminal ; it has no other
concern than the optimal self-management of its memory banks.
Pure magnetization - that of the response by the question,
the real by the model, the 0 by the 1, the network by its very
existence, the speakers by their mere connection, the pure tactility of the signal, the sheer virtue of "contact," the total affinity of one terminal for another : this is the image of seduction,
scattered and diffused throughout all our current systems. A
self-seduction/self-management that simply reflects the networks" circularity, and the shortcircuiting of each of their atoms
or particles. (Some might speak. here of narcissism, and why
not? If only because one should not transpose terms like narcissism and seduction to a register that does not concern them,
that of simulation).
Thus according toJean Querzola in "Le silicium fleur de peau"
(Traverses, no. 14/15) : psychobiological technology - all the
computer prosthesis and self-adjusting electronic' networks we
possess - provides us with a kind of strange bioelectronic mirror, in which each person, like some digital narcissus, is going
to slide along the trajectory of a death drive and sink in his or
her own image. Narcissus = narcosis (McLuhan had already
made the connection):
Electronic narcosis: it is the ultimate risk of digital simulation .. . We would slip from Oedipus to
Narcissus. . . At the end of the self-management of
our bodies and pleasures there would be a slow
narcissistic narcosis. In a word, with silicon, what
happens to the reality principle? I am not saying
that the world's digitalization will soon put an end
to Oedipus . I am noting that the development of
biology and information technology is accompanied by the dissolution of the personality structure we call Oedipal . The dissolution of these

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 167

structures uncovers another region, where the
father is absent : it has to do with the maternal, the
oceanic feeling and the death drive. It is not a neurosis that threatens, but something of the order of
a psychosis. A pathological narcissism . . . We believe
that we understand the forms of the social bond
built on Oedipus. But when the latter no longer
functions, what will power do? After authority,
seduction?
The finest example of this "bionic mirror" and "narcissistic
necrosis" is cloning, the extreme form of self-seduction: from
the Same to the Same without going through the Other.
In the United States a child might be born in the same way
as a geranium, by taking cuttings . The first child-clone - genealogy by vegetative multiplication . The first child born from the
single cell of an individual, his "father," the sole parent, of which
he will be the exact copy, the perfect twin, the double (D . Rorvik, `A son image: la copie d'un homme"). Infinite human propagation by cuttings, with each cell of an individuated organism
capable of becoming the matrix for an identical individual .
My genetic inheritance was fixed once and for all
when a certain spermatozoid met a certain ovary.
This inheritance bears the formula for all the biochemical processes that have created me and ensure my functioning. A copy of this formula is inscribed in each of the tens of billions of cells that
constitute me. Each of them knows my makeup;
before being a cell of my liver or blood, it is a cell
of me. It is therefore theoretically possible to construct an individual identical to myself from any
one of them . (Pr. A . Jacquard)
Projection and internment in the mirror of the genetic code.
There is no better prosthesis than D.N.A ., no finer narcissistic
extension than that new image bestowed on modern beings in
place of their specular image: their molecular formula. Here
is where one will find one's "truth" - in the indefinite repeti-

16 8 SEDUCTION

tion of one's "real," biological being. This narcissism, whose
source is no longer a mirror but a formula, is a monstrous parody of the myth of Narcissus. A cold narcissism, a cold selfseduction, without even that minimal distance necessary for
the experience of oneself as an illusion . The materialization of
the real, biological double in the clone cuts short the possibility of playing with one's own image and, thereby, playing with
one's own death.
'
The double is an imaginary figure that, like the, soul or one's
shadow, or one's image in a mirror, haunts the subject with a
faint death that has to be constantly warded off. If it materializes, death is imminent . This fantastic proposition is now literally realized in cloning. The clone is the very image of death,
but without the symbolic illusion that once gave it its charm.
Something of the subject's intimacy with himself rests on the
immateriality of his double, on the fact that it is and remains
a phantasy. One can and must dream throughout one's life of
the perfect duplication or multiplication of one's being, but it
remains a dream, and is destroyed when one tries to make it
real . The same holds for the primal scene or that of seduction:
they too only work when recalled and phantasized, never when
real . It was up to our period to try and materialize this phantasy - like so many others - and by way of total confusion, change
the play with one's double from a subtle exchange with death
and the other into an eternity of the same .
The dream of eternal twins as a substitute for sexual reproduction . A cellular dream of schizogenesis - the surest form of
parenthood, since it finally allows one to bypass the other, and
go from the same to the same (one will still require a woman's
uterus, and a hollowed out ovum, but these aids are short-lived
and anonymous - any female prosthesis will do). A monocellular utopia that, by way of genetics, will enable complex
beings to attain the destiny of protozoa.
Is there a death drive that pushes sexed beings towards a form
of reproduction anterior to their acquisition of sexual identities - (moreover, doesn't this fissiparous form, this proliferation by contiguity conjure up death in the deepest recesses of
our imaginary - as something that denies sexuality and seeks
to annihilate it, the latter being the bearer of life and therefore

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 169

a critical and mortal form of reproduction?) - and that simultaneously pushes them to deny all alterity so that they need
no longer strive for anything but the perpetuation of an identity, the transparency of a genetic code all the more dedicated
to procreation?
Let us leave the death drive. Perhaps we are dealing with a
fantasy of self-engendering? But no, for the subject might dream
of eliminating the parental figures and even substituting himself for them, but he cannot eliminate the symbolic structure
of procreation : when one becomes one's own child, one is still
the child of someone. Cloning by contrast, abolishes not just
the Mother, but the Father, the crossing of their genes, the immixture of their differences, and above all the duel act that engendering supposes . The person cloned does not engender
himself: he comes to bud from a segment . One might speculate on the wealth of these plant-like branchings that dissolve
Oedipal sexuality in favour of an "non-human" sex - but the
fact remains that both the Father and Mother have disappeared,
and in favour of a matrix/code [the word "matrice" means both
"matrix" and "womb"]. No more mother, just a matrix . And
henceforth it is the matrix of the genetic code that will "give
birth" without end in an operative manner purged of all contingent sexuality.
Nor can one speak any longer of a subject, since the identitarian reduplication puts an end to its division . The mirror
stage is abolished, or rather parodied in monstrous fashion,
marking the end of the age-old dream of the subject's narcissistic projection . For the latter still supposes a mirror, the mirror in which the subject alienates himself in order to find
himself, or stares at himself only to see his own death. But here
there is no mirror : an industrial object within a series does not
"mirror" the identical object that succeeds it . The one is never
a mirage, an ideal or danger for the other. At most such objects
can be added up, for they have not been engendered sexually
and are not aware of death.
A segment does not require the mediation of the imaginary
for its reproduction - no more than an earthworm. Each segment of a worm is reproduced directly as the complete worm
- each cell of an American industrialist can give rise to a new

170 SEDUCTION

industrialist . Just as each fragment of a hologram can become
a matrix of the complete hologram ; all the information being
contained in each of the scattered fragments.
The same logic marks the end of the concept of totality. If
all the information can be found in each of the parts, the whole
loses its meaning. It also marks the end of the body, of this singular being we call the body, this singular configuration that
cannot be segmented into additional cells, as witnessed by the
fact of sexuality. Paradoxically, cloning will fabricate sexed beings in perpetuity, since they will resemble their models, even
as the sex organs lose their function . But then sex 'is not a function, for it exceeds all the body's parts and functions. Indeed,
it exceeds all the data that can be obtained about the body,
which the genetic code claims to collect. This is why the latter
can only clear the way to a type of autonomous reproduction,
independent of sex and death .
;

The bio-physio-anatomical sciences had already begun the
analytical decomposition of the body with its dissection into
organs and functions. Micro-molecular genetics is its logical consequence at a much higher level of abstraction and simulation :
the nuclear level of the command cell, the directive level of
the genetic code around which this entire phantasmagoria is
organized .
In the mechanistic vision we can still speak of "traditional"
simulation, each organ being only a partial and differentiated
prosthesis . In the bio-cybernetic vision, the smallest undifferentiated element, the cell becomes an embryonic prosthesis of
the entire body. The formula inscribed in each cell becomes
the true modern prosthesis of all bodies . For if a prosthesis is
generally an artifact that replaces a failing organ, or an instrumental prolongation of the body, then the DNA molecule
that contains all the data relative to a living being, is the prosthesis par excellence, since it will allow that being to prolong itself indefinitely. In truth, it will become nothing more than the
indefinite series of its cybernetic avatars.
We are speaking of a prosthesis even more artificial than any

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION

171

mechanical prosthesis . For the genetic code is not "natural ."
Whenever a part is abstracted from the whole and rendered
autonomous, it alters the whole by substituting itself for it (prothesis - this is its etymological meaning) . In this sense one can
say that the genetic code, which claims to condense an entire
living being because it contains all the latter's "data" (genetic
simulation is incredibly violent) is an artifact, an artificial matrix,
a simulation matrix, from which will proceed, no longer by
reproduction, but by pure and simple repetition, identical beings assigned to the same commands .

Cloning is, therefore, the ultimate state of the body's simulation, where the individual, reduced to an abstract genetic formula, is destined to serial multiplication . Walter Benjamin said
that in the age of mechanical reproduction the work of art loses
its "aura," the unique quality of its here and now, its aesthetic
form : it is no longer destined for seduction but reproduction,
and in its new destiny, takes on apolitical form. The original
is lost, and only nostalgia can restore its "authenticity." The extreme form of this process is to be found in our contemporary
mass media, where there never was an original, things being
conceived from the start in terms of their unlimited reproducibility.
This is exactly what happens to human beings with cloning .
This is what happens to the body when conceived only as informational stock, or as data to be processed . Nothing then prevents its serial reproduction in the same terms Benjamin used
when speaking of industrial objects or images . The genetic
model has precedence over all possible bodies .
Behind this reversal lies the incursion of a technology that
Benjamin had already described as a total medium - an enormous prosthesis for the generation of identical and indistinguishable objects and images - but without yet conceiving of
the current deepening of this technology, which makes possible the generation of identical beings, without any possible
return to an original being. The prosthesis of the industrial age
were still external, exotecbnical - while those that we are coming

172

SEDUCTION

to know have branched out and been interiorized : esotechnical.
We live in an age of soft technologies, of genetic and mental
software. The prosthesis of the industrial age, its machines, still
paid heed to the body in order to modify its image - and were
themselves metabolized in an imaginary, this metabolism becoming part of the body's image:. But when simulation reaches
the point of no return, when the prosthesis infiltrate the body's
anonymous, micro-molecular core, when they force themselves
on the body as its matrix, and burn out all the succeeding symbolic circuits such that all future bodies will be only its immutable repetition - then the body and its history have come to an
end, the individual being no more than the cancerous metastasis
of his basic formula .

Is not the cloning of individuals from an individual X similar to the proliferation of a single cell one identifies with cancer?
There is a close relation between the concept of the genetic
code and the pathology of cancer. The code designates the
minimal formula to which one can reduce an individual such
that he can (and can only) be repeated, while with cancer the
same type of cell proliferates without concern for the organic
laws of the whole. Thus with cloning one witnesses the repetition of the Same, the proliferation of a single matrix . Formerly
sexual reproduction prevented this, but today one can finally
isolate the genetic matrix of identity, and eliminate all the
differential vicissitudes that gave individuals their aleatory
charm . Or their seductiveness.
The metastasis that began with industrial objects ends in cellular organization . Cancer is the disease that dominates contemporary pathology, because it is the very form of the code's
virulence : the aggravated redundancy of the same cells, or the
same signals.

Cloning is very much in keeping with the irreversible tendency to "extend and deepen the system's internal transparency by increasing its possibilities of self-regulation and modifying
its informational economy" (Querzola) .
All drives will be expelled . Everything interior (networks,

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 17 3

functions, organs, conscious or unconscious circuits) will be
exteriorized in the form of prosthesis that will constitute an ideal
corpus orbiting around the body, but with the latter as its own
satellite. Every nucleus will be enucleated and projected into
spatial orbit.
The clone is the materialization of the genetic formula in human form. But it will not stop there. All the body's secrets sex, anguish, even the subtle pleasures derived from mere existence - everything that you do not, and do not want to know
about yourself, will be turned into bio-feed-back, and returned
to you in the form of "built-in" digital information. It is the bionic mirror stage (Querzola) .
A digital Narcissus instead of a triangular Oedipus. The
hypostasis of the artificial double, the clone will be your guardian angel, the visible form of your unconscious and the flesh
of your flesh, not metaphorically but literally. Your "fellow creature" will henceforth be the clone with its hallucinatory resemblance, such that you will never be alone, and will never have
any secrets. "Love your neighbour as yourself" - the difficulties of living the Gospel will be resolved . Your neighbour is
yourself. Love is therefore total. Total self-seduction.

The masses themselves form a clone-like apparatus that functions without the mediation of the other. In the last analysis,
the masses are simply the sum of all the systems' terminals a network travelled by digital impulses (this is what forms a
mass). Oblivious to external injunctions, they constitute themselves into integrated circuits given over to manipulation (selfmanipulation) and "seduction" (self-seduction) .
In truth, nobody any longer knows how a representational
apparatus works, or even if it still exists . Still, it is becoming
increasingly urgent to rationalize possible occurrences in the
universe of simulation . What happens between an absent,
hypothetical pole of power and the neutral, elusive pole formed
by the masses? The answer : seduction . Things work by
seduction.
But such seduction suggests the workings of a social world

174 SEDUCTION

that we no longer comprehend, and a political' world whose
structures have faded . In place of the latter, seduction gives rise
to an immense blank area traversed by tepid currents of speech,
or a malleable network lubricated by magnetic impulses . The
world is no longer driven by power, but fascination, no longer
by production, but seduction . This seduction is, however, no
more than an empty declaration formed of simulated concepts.
The discourses held by both the "strategists" of mass desire
(the politicians, advertisers, organizers, engineers of the soul,
and of the mind, etc.) and the "analysts" of their strategies, these
discourses that describe the functioning of the social or the political, or what remains of there, in terms of seduction, they
are as vacuous as the political space itself. They,simply refract
the emptiness of that about which they speak. "The media
seduce the masses," "the masses seduce themselves" - the use
of the word seduction here is incredibly shallow and hackneyed.
Corrupted of its literal meaning, which implies charm and mortal
enchantment, the term comes to signify the social and technical lubrication required for smooth relations - a smooth semiurgy, a soft technology. The term then has an "ecological"
connotation, and marks the passage from hard to soft energies.
Soft energy, soft seduction . The social made scarce .

With this diffuse, tensile form of seduction, orie is no longer
speaking of the aristocratic seduction of duel relations. One is
speaking of a seduction reviewed and revised by the ideology of
desire. A psychologized seduction that results from its vulgarization
with the rise in the West of the imaginary figure of desire .
This figure does not belong to the masters, but was historically produced by the oppressed under the sign of their liberation, and has been deepened by the failure of successive
revolutions. As a form, desire marks the passage from their status as objects to that of subjects, but this passage is itself only
a more refined, interiorized perpetuation of their servitude. The
first glimmerings of mass subjectivity at the dawn of modern
and revolutionary times - the first glimmerings of the fact that
the masses were subjects and could manage their own servi-

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION 17 5

tude under the sign of their own desires! Large-scale seduction
now begins. For if an object can simply be dominated, the subject of desire, by contrast, has to be seduced.
This soft strategy will spread, socially and historically. The
masses will be psychologized in order to be seduced, they will
be rigged up with desires in order to be distracted . Yesterday
they had a (mystified!) consciousness and were alienated - today they have an unconscious and (repressed and corrupted)
desires and are seduced . Yesterday they were diverted from the
(revolutionary) truth of history - today they are diverted from
the truth of their own desires. The poor, seduced and manipulated masses! Where once they had to endure domination under the threat of violence, now they must accept it by dint of
seduction.

Speaking more generally, the theoretical hallucination of
desire, with its diffuse libidinal psychology, serves as a backdrop to that simulacrum of seduction which one now finds
everywhere. Having replaced the world of surveillance, it characterizes the vulnerability of both individuals and masses to soft
injunctions . Distilled in homeophatic doses throughout all personal and social relations, the seductive shadow of this discourse
hovers today over the desert of social relations, and of power
itself .
In this sense, we truly live in an era of seduction. But we can
no longer speak of that form of absorption or potential engulfment, that fateful distraction from which no one or no "reality" can ever be completely safe (perhaps there is no longer
enough reality to deflect, nor truth to subvert) . Nor even of the
corruption of innocence or virtue (there is no longer sufficient
morality - or perversion - for that) . All that remains is to seduce
in order to seduce? "Seduce me." "Let me seduce you ." It is
the seduction that remains when all the stakes have been withdrawn. We are no longer speaking about a violence committed against meaning or about its silent extermination, but about
what is left to language when it no longer has anything to say.
No longer a vertiginous loss, but the minimalist form of mutu-

17 6

SEDUCTION

al gratification two linguistic beings can give each other in an
enervated social relation. "Seduce me." "Let me seduce you."
In this sense, seduction is everywhere, surreptitiously or openly, blending in with the ambiance, the constant solicitations,
with exchange pure and simple. It is the seduction of student
and teacher (I am seducing you and you are seducing me, there
being nothing else to do), of the politician and his public, of
power (ah, the seduction of power and the power of seduction!), of the analyst and the analysand, etc.
The Jesuits were already famous for having used seduction
in a religious guise, for having returned the throngs to the bosom of the Catholic church by the worldly and aesthetic seductionof the baroque, and having :recaptured the consciences of
the powerful by the expedient of fancy goods and fancy women . In effect, the Jesuits provide: the first modern example of
the elaboration of a strategy of mass desire and a society of mass
seduction. And they were relatively successful . It is entirely possible that, once the austere charms of political economy and
producer capitalism - capitalism's puritan cycle - have been
swept away, a catholic and Jesuitical era will begin, with a soft
technology of seduction and a soft, rosy semiurgy.
It is no longer a matter of seduction as passion, but of a demandfor seduction . Of an invocation of desire and its realization in place of the faltering relations of power and knowledge
that inhere in love and transference . What happens 'to the masterslave dialectic when the master has been seduced by the slave,
and the slave by the master? Seduction becomes no more than
an effusion of differences or a discursive libidinal striptease. With
a vague collusion between supply and demand, seduction becomes nothing more than an exchange value, serving the circulation of exchanges and the lubrication of social relations.
What remains of the enchantrrient of that labyrinthine structure within which one could lose oneself? What is left of seduction's imposture? "There is another type of violence, which has
neither its name nor outward appearance, but which is no less
dangerous. I am speaking of seduction" (Rollin). Traditionally,
the seducer was an impostor who employed subterfuge and villainy to achieve his ends - or at least who believed he was employing them . For the other, by allowing herself to be seduced,

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION

177

by succumbing to the imposture, often voided it, stripped the
seducer of his control . In effect, he falls into his own trap for
having failed to consider seduction's reversible power.
The following always holds : the one who seeks to please the
other has already succumbed to the other's charms. On this
basis, an entire religion or culture can be organized around relations of seduction (as opposed to relations of production) .
Thus the Greek gods - seducers /impostors - used their power
to seduce men, but were seduced in turn, and indeed were often
reduced to seducing men, this being their main task. Thus they
provided the image of a world order ruled not by laws, as in
the Christian universe or political economy, but by a mutual
seduction that ensured the symbolic equilibrium between gods
and men .
What remains of this violence trapped by its own artifice?
That universe where gods and men sought to please each other
- even by the violent seduction of sacrifice - has ended . As
has the secret understanding of signs and analogies that provided
magic with its power of enchantment. And with it, the assumption that the entire world is susceptible to seduction and reversible in signs - not just the gods, but inanimate beings, things,
and the dead themselves who have always had to be seduced,
bewitched and cast out with the aid of numerous signs and rituals, lest they do any harm . Today one has to work through one's
own mourning, an individual and eerie task of reorientation
and redeployment . We now live in a universe of forces and relations of force, a universe that has materialized as in a void,
an object of mastery and not seduction. A universe of production, investments, counter-investments and the liberation of
energies, a universe of the Law and objective laws, a universe
of the master-slave dialectic.
Sexuality itself arose within this universe as one of its objective functions, and now tends to overdetermine all the others,
substituting itself as an alternative finality for those that are disappearing or already defunct. Everything is sexualized and thereby acquires something of a terrain for adventure and play.
Everywhere the id speaks . Every discourse appear as an eternal commentary on sex and desire. In this sense, one might say
that they have all become discourses of seduction, discourses

178 SEDUCTION

that register an explicit demand for seduction, but a soft seduction, whose weakened condition has become synonymous with
so much else in this society - the ambience, the manipulation,
the persuasion, the gratification, the strategies of desire, the mystique of personal relations, the libidinal economy and its
smoothed over relations of transference which relays the competitive economy and its relations of force. This seduction,
which permeates the entire expanse of language, has no more
substance or sense than the power that pervades all the interstices of the social network. This is why they are able to combine their discourses so easily. The degenerated metalanguage
of seduction combined with the degenerated metalanguage of
politics is everywhere operative (or if one will,, is absolutely
non-operative). It is enough that there be a consensus concerning the model ofseduction's simulation, the diffuse stream of
speech and desire - just as the murky metalanguage of participation suffices to safeguard an :appearance of sociality.

The discourse of simulation is not an imposture. It has only
to have seduction act as a simulacrum of affect, desire, or libidinal investment, in a world where the need for these is cruelly
felt . However, just as the "relations of force" were never able
to explain the vicissitudes of power in the panoptic age - except in Marxian idealism - similarly seduction, or the relations
of seduction, cannot account for contemporary political events .
If everything is driven by seduction, it would not be by this
soft seduction, as revised by the ideology of desire, but by a
defiant seduction, a dual, antagonistic seduction with the stakes
maximized, including those that are secret . It would not be by
a game strategy, but by a mythical seduction, not a psychological and operative seduction, not a cold, minimalist seduction.

V
SEDUCTION AS DESTINY
Are we to think that this diffuse seduction, which is neither
attractive nor dangerous, this specter of seduction that haunts
our circuits without secrets, our phantasies without affect, and
our contact networks without contacts, that this is its pure form?
As if the modern happening with its participation and expressiveness, where the stage and its magic have disappeared, would
be the theater's pure form? Or as if the hypothetical and hyperreal mode of intervention in reality - in acting pictures, landart and body art - where the object, frame and staging of illusions have disappeared, would be the pure form of painting
and art?
We are living, in effect, amongst pure forms, in a radical obscenity, that is to say, in the visible, undifferentiated obscenity
of figures that were once secret and discrete . The same is true
of the social, which today rules in its pure - i .e., empty and
obscene - form. The same for seduction, which in its present
form, having lost its elements of risk, suspense and sorcery, takes
the form of a faint, undifferentiated obscenity.
Shall we refer to Walter Benjamin's geneology of the work
of art and its destiny? At first, the work of art has the status
of a ritual object, related to an ancestral form of cult. Next it
takes on a cultural or aesthetic form in a system with fewer obligations; it still retains a singular character, though the latter

180 SEDUCTION

is no longer immanent to the ritual object, but transcendental
and individualized . Lastly, the aesthetic form gives way to apolitical form in which the work of art as such disappears before
the inevitable progress of mechanical reproduction . If in the
ritual form there are no originals (the aesthetic originality of
cult objects is of little concern in the sacred), the original is
again lost in the political form. There is only the multiplication of objects; the political form corresponding to the object's
maximum circulation and minimum intensity.
Seduction too would have had its ritual phase (duel, magical, agonistic) ; its aesthetic phase (as reflected in the "aesthetic
strategy" of the seducer, whose domain approaches that of the
feminine and sexuality, the ironic and the diabolic - it is then
that seduction takes on the meaning it has for us : the possibly
accursed distraction of appearances, their strategies, their play) ;
and finally its "political" phase (taking up Benjamin's term, here
somewhat ambiguous) . In this last phase the original of seduction, its ritual and aesthetic form, disappears in favour of an
all-out ventilation whereby seduction becomes 'the informal
form ofpolitics, the scaled-down framework for an elusive politics devoted to the endless reproduction of a form without
content. (This informal form is inseparable from its technical
nature, which is that of networks - just as the political form
of the object is inseparable from the techniques of serial
reproduction) . As with the object, this "political" form corresponds to seduction's maximum diffusion and minimum intensity.
Is this to be seduction's destiny? Or can we oppose this involutional fate, and lay a wager on seduction as destiny? Production as destiny, or seduction as destiny? Against the deep
structures and their truth, appearances and their destiny? Be
that as it may, we are living today in non-sense, and if simulation is its disenchanted form, seduction is its enchanted form .
Anatomy is not destiny, nor is politics : seduction is destiny.
It is what remains of a magical, fateful world, a risky, vertiginous
and predestined world; it is what is quietly effective in a visibly efficient and stolid world .

THE POLITICAL DESTINY OF SEDUCTION

181

The world is naked, the king is naked, and things are clear.
All of production, and truth itself, are directed towards disclosure, the unbearable "truth" of sex being but the most recent consequence. Luckily, at bottom, there is nothing to it.
And seduction_ still holds, in the face of truth, a most sibylline
response, which is that "perhaps we wish to uncover the truth
because it is so difficult to imagine it naked."

CultureTexts
Arthur andMarilouise Kroker

General Editors

SIEIDUC
.TUGII~
Jean Baudrillard
translated by Brian Singer
NOTHING
CANBEGREATER
THAN
SEDUCTION
THAT
ITSELF, NOTEVENTHEORDER
DESTROYS
IT
"Seduction is a theory-fiction

which resembles nothing which has preceded
it . It turns manycontemporary discourses inside out, even the most radical,
and could very well challenge all moderntheory, even, indeed, the rules of
theoretical production itself ." Liberation
. . . probably the most influential
theorist ." NewStatesman
". . . for Baudrillard,

contemporary media analyst and social

is not seduction a newfigure of our freedom?" L'Express

Seduction is Jean Baudrillard's most provocative book. Here, under the sign of
seduction all of moderntheory is put into question, feminism andpsychoanalysis
in the order of things
most of all . Seduction speaks of the sudden reversibility
where discourse is absorbed into its ownsigns without a trace of meaning. In
the sudden triumph of seduction in apocalyptic culture there is also signalled
the end of history .
his works
Jean Baudrillard is lecturer in Sociology, University of Nanterre . Among
translated into English are America, Simulations andSimulacra, Forget Foucault,
In the Shadowof the Silent Majorities, andFor a Critique of the Political Economy
of the Sign .
Brian Singer teaches at GlendonCollege, York University, and is the author of
Society, Theory andthe French Revolution (Macmillan/St . Martin's Press, 1986).

Cover : ManRay Femme
aux longs cbeveux, 1929 ©VIS ART
Book and Cover Design : Marilouise Kroker

ISBN

Printed in Canada

