Consumer 

Society 



Myths &amp; 
Structures 




The Consumer Society 



Theory, Culture &amp; Society 


Theory, Culture &amp; Society caters for the resurgence of interest in culture within 
contemporary social science and the humanities. Building on the heritage of 
classical social theory, the book series examines ways in which this tradition 
has been reshaped by a new generation of theorists. It will also publish 
theoretically informed analyses of everyday life, popular culture, and new 
intellectual movements. 

editor: Mike Featherstone, Nottingham Trent University 

SERIES EDITORIAL BOARD 

Roy Boyne, University of Durham 
Mike Hepworth, University of Aberdeen 
Scott Lash, Lancaster University 
Roland Robertson, University of Pittsburgh 
Bryan S. Turner, Deakin University 

THE TCS CENTRE 

The Theory, Culture &amp; Society book series, the journals Theory, Culture &amp; 
Society and Body &amp; Society, and related conference, seminar and postgraduate 
programmes operate from the TCS Centre at Nottingham Trent University. For 
further details of the TCS Centre's activities please contact: 

Centre Administrator 
The TCS Centre, Room 175 
Faculty of Humanities 
Nottingham Trent University 

Clifton Lane, Nottingham, NG11 8NS, UK e-mail: tcs@ntu.ac.uk 

Recent volumes include: 

The Body and Society 

Explorations in Social Theory 
Second edition 
Bryan S. Turner 

The Social Construction of Nature 

Klaus Eder 

Deleuze and Guattari 

An Introduction to the Politics of Desire 
Philip Goodchild 

Pierre Bourdieu and Cultural Theory 

Critical Investigations 
Bridget Fowler 

Re-Forming the Body 

Religion, Community and Modernity 
Philip A. Mellor and Chris Shilling 

The Shopping Experience 

edited by Pasi Falk and Colin Campbell 

Undoing Aesthetics 

Wolfgang Welsch 

Simmel on Culture: Selected Writings 

edited by David Frisby and Mike Featherstone 



The Consumer Society 

Myths and Structures 


Jean Baudrillard 



SAGE Publications 

London • Thousand Oaks • New Delhi 



English translation copyright© Sage Publications 1998 
Introduction © George Ritzer 1998 

Originally published as La societe de consommation © Editions 
Denoel 1970 

This edition 1998, Reprinted 1999 

This translation is published with financial support from the 
French Ministry of Culture 

Published in association with Theory, Culture &amp; Society, 
Nottingham Trent University 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, transmitted or utilized in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, without permission in writing from the 
Publishers. 


SAGE Publications Ltd 
6 Bonhill Street 
London EC2A 4PU 


SAGE Publications Inc. 

2455 Teller Road 

Thousand Oaks, California 9 1 320 


SAGE Publications India Pvt Ltd 
32, M-Block Market 
Greater Kailash - I 
New Delhi 1 10 048 


British Library Cataloguing in Publication data 

A catalogue record for this book is available from 
the British Library 


ISBN 0 7619 5691 3 
ISBN 0 7619 5692 1 (pbk) 


Library of Congress catalog card number 97-061881 


Typeset by Photoprint, Torquay, Devon 

Printed in Great Britain by Redwood Books, Trowbridge, Wiltshire 



Shower him with all earthly blessings, plunge him so deep into happi- 
ness that nothing is visible but the bubbles rising to the surface of his 
happiness, as if it were water; give him such economic prosperity that he 
will have nothing left to do but sleep, eat gingerbread, and worry about 
the continuance of world history. 

Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Notes from Underground 



Contents 

Foreword ix 

Translator's Acknowledgements xi 

Introduction 1 

George Ritzer 

Part I The Formal Liturgy of the Object 

1 Profusion 25 

2 The Miraculous Status of Consumption 31 

3 The Vicious Circle of Growth 37 

Part II The Theory of Consumption 

4 The Social Logic of Consumption 49 

5 Towards a Theory of Consumption 69 

6 Personalization or the Smallest Marginal Difference 87 

Part III Mass Media, Sex and Leisure 

7 Mass-Media Culture 99 

8 The Finest Consumer Object: The Body 129 

9 The Drama of Leisure or the Impossibility of Wasting 

One's Time 151 

10 The Mystique of Solicitude 159 

11 Anomie in the Affluent Society 174 

Conclusion On Contemporary Alienation or the End of 187 

the Pact with the Devil 

Notes 197 

Index 204 




Foreword 


Jean Baudrillard's book The Consumer Society is a masterful contribution 
to contemporary sociology. It certainly has its place in the tradition 
which includes Durkheim's The Division of Labour in Society, Veblen's 
Theory of the Leisure Class and David Riesman's The Lonely Crowd. 

Baudrillard analyses our contemporary Western societies, including 
that of the United States. This analysis focuses on the phenomenon of the 
consumption of objects which he has already tackled in The System of 
Objects (Gallimard, 1968; translation. Verso, 1996). In his conclusion to 
that volume, he formulates the plan of the present work: 'It has to be 
made clear from the outset that consumption is an active form of 
relationship (not only to objects, but also to society and to the world), a 
mode of systematic activity and global response which founds our entire 
cultural system.' 

He shows with great perspicacity how the giant technocratic corpora- 
tions foster irrepressible desires, creating new social hierarchies which 
have replaced the old class differences. 

A new mythology has arisen in this way. As Baudrillard writes. 

The washing machine serves as an appliance and acts as an element of prestige, 
comfort, etc. It is strictly this latter field which is the field of consumption. All 
kinds of other objects may be substituted here for the washing machine as 
signifying element. In the logic of signs, as in that of symbols, objects are no 
longer linked in any sense to a definite function or need. Precisely because they 
are responding here to something quite different, which is either the social 
logic or the logic of desire, for which they function as a shifting and 
unconscious field of signification. 

Consumption, as a new tribal myth, has become the morality of our 
present world. It is currently destroying the foundations of the human 
being, that is to say, the balance which European thought has maintained 
since the Greeks between our mythological roots and the world of the 
logos. Baudrillard is aware of the risk we are running. Let us quote him 
once again: 

Just as medieval society was balanced on God and the Devil, so ours is 
balanced on consumption and its denunciation. Though at least around the 
Devil heresies and black magic sects could organize. Our magic is white. No 
heresy is possible any longer in a state of affluence. It is the prophylactic 
whiteness of a saturated society, a society with no history and no dizzying 
heights, a society with no myth other than itself. 

The Consumer Society, written in a concise style, should be carefully 
studied by the younger generation. Perhaps they will take up the 



X 


The consumer society 


mission of breaking up this monstrous, if not indeed obscene, world of 
the abundance of objects so formidably sustained by the mass media and 
particularly by television, this world which threatens us all. 

J.P. Mayer 
University of Reading 



Translator's Acknowledgements 


I would like to thank Marie-Dominique Maison, Leslie Hill, Mike Gane 
and Glynis Powell for various forms of linguistic assistance with this 
translation. Thanks are also due to Richard G. Smith for providing some 
invaluable background information. 

For reasons of style, the author has made some very minor changes to 
the original text. I have personally taken the liberty of numbering the 
chapters. 

C.T. 



Introduction 

George Ritzer 


This English translation of The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures 
(originally published in 1970) will be both a treat and a revelation to 
admirers of the work of Jean Baudrillard not fluent in French. Here is an 
early work by a scholar who has come to be thought of by many as the 
leading postmodern social theorist. 1 Postmodernists will be gratified to 
find, at least in their rudimentary form, many of the ideas associated 
with Baudrillard's later, more postmodern theorizing. Modernists will 
find a Baudrillard who is a much more modern social thinker than he is 
usually thought to be; one who is apt to be far more to their liking than 
the Baudrillard of the last decade or so. Metatheorists 2 will find many 
rewards in this work including a greater sense of Baudrillard's theoret- 
ical roots and the challenge of understanding a work of a thinker who 
was clearly in the throes of a profound intellectual transformation. Most 
importantly, theorists and other students of consumer society will dis- 
cover a treasure trove of insights and perspectives into the world of 
consumption. Thus, this is a rewarding book at many levels, although it 
has, as we will see, its flaws. 

This is no dusty and outdated theoretical work that is of little more 
than historical interest. In fact, it is a highly contemporary work that 
reads very well over a quarter of a century after its initial publication. 3 
There is, for example, Baudrillard's discussion of such timely issues as 
sexually ambiguous, hermaphroditic models not unlike those who adorn 
the controversial Calvin Klein advertisements these days; the booming 
interest in fitness; the desire for slimness and the resulting dieting mania; 
obesity and the obsession with low-calorie, low-fat foods; and the 
burgeoning use of sexuality for commercial purposes. More generally, 
and importantly, this is a book about consumption and it is clear that 
Baudrillard was far ahead of his time in focusing on this issue. While 
most of his contemporaries in France (and elsewhere) were mired in stale 
old debates about production, Baudrillard recognized that consumption 
was where the important new issues and problems were to be found. 
Time has clearly borne Baudrillard out. There has been an outpouring of 
work, especially in Great Britain (for an overview, see Gabriel and Lang, 
1995), on consumption and postmodern society is now seen as being 
more or less synonymous with consumer society (Featherstone, 1991; 
Bauman, 1992). 



2 


The consumer society 


Baudrillard's foresight as far as consumption is concerned is exempli- 
fied by the fact, among others, that he dealt with the issue of credit at this 
early stage in the development of the modern credit, especially credit 
card, system. 4 To this day, this issue has received virtually no attention 
from social theorists. 5 This is in spite of the fact that it is an absolutely 
central aspect of the booming consumer society. Yet, when Baudrillard 
was writing in the late 1960s the credit card industry was in its infancy 
and it was not to begin to profoundly transform society until long after 
The Consumer Society was published. Thus, Baudrillard was ahead of his 
time in recognizing the importance of this issue, and many other issues, 
associated with the consumer society. 

A Modem Work 

There are many ways in which The Consumer Society can be seen as a 
piece of modern social theory. The book offers a generally sustained and 
coherent argument. While this was also true of the previously published 
The System of Objects (1968/1996), and remained the case for a number of 
Baudrillard's works that followed in the 1970s and into the early 1980s, it 
is certainly not true of the more recent works which often read like 
pastiches of aphorisms with little or nothing to connect them. The 
modern reader who is put off by Baudrillard's more recent postmodern 
style will be more comfortable with the structure and development of 
The Consumer Society. 

The scholarly format of the book will be familiar to most modern 
readers. Intellectual predecessors and antagonists are clear (something 
not always the case in postmodern works) and, as a result, so are the 
roots of many of Baudrillard's ideas. A powerful intellectual presence 
is John Kenneth Galbraith, especially his book The Affluent Society 
(1958/1964). Baudrillard uses many of Galbraith's ideas, and his critical 
analysis of them, to develop his own perspective on the affluent, that is 
consumer, society. For example, Baudrillard argues that there is no such 
thing as an affluent society; all societies combine 'structural excess' and 
'structural penury'. Rather than an affluent society, Baudrillard argues 
that we live in a 'growth society'. However, this growth brings us no 
closer to being an affluent society. Growth produces both wealth and 
poverty. In fact, growth is a function of poverty; growth is needed to 
contain the poor and maintain the system. While he is not always 
consistent on this, Baudrillard argues that the growth society is, in fact, 
the opposite of the affluent society. Its inherent tensions lead to psycho- 
logical pauperization as well as systematic penury (see later) since 
'needs' will always outstrip the production of goods. Since both wealth 
and shortage are inherent in the system, efforts like those proposed by 
Galbraith to solve the problem of poverty are doomed to failure. Thus, in 
various ways, Baudrillard not only critiques, but also builds in very 
modern ways upon, Galbraith's work. 



Introduction 


3 


Baudrillard makes similar, albeit far less elaborate, use of the ideas of 
other important thinkers of the day such as Marshall McLuhan, Daniel 
Bell, David Riesman, Daniel Boorstin, and even the popular writer Vance 
Packard. In other words, the intellectual landscape explored by 
Baudrillard was one that would have been much the same had a thinker 
less associated with the move to postmodern theory approached the 
topic of the consumer society in the late 1960s. And he explores that 
landscape in ways that are very familiar to the modernist. 

More importantly, the set of classic social theorists informing 
Baudrillard's work was much the same as affected the theorizing of more 
conventional thinkers of the day. The most powerful presence, at least 
overtly, 6 is Marx, but Durkheim, Veblen, and Levi-Strauss also play 
central roles in this analysis (Tocqueville is there, as well). Furthermore, 
there is an effort to synthesize ideas from these theorists with a number 
of other theoretical inputs. A modern, mainstream social theorist would 
be quite comfortable with both the theoretical heritage and the synthetic 
efforts involved in this work. 

The important role accorded to Marx and his ideas, especially com- 
modities and their use-value and exchange-value, is interesting in light 
of the fact that Baudrillard was soon to break with Marx in The Mirror of 
Production (1973/1975) and move progressively away from a Marxian 
perspective. Marxian theory is only one of several inputs shaping this 
work and in at least one crucial way (to be discussed later) this book 
deviates dramatically from a Marxian orientation. 

Part of the reason for his influence is the fact that Marx, the master 
theorist of production, also has much to offer to anyone concerned with 
consumption. There are many parallels drawn by Baudrillard between 
production and consumption (for example, just as wage labour extorted 
labour power and increases in productivity, credit extorts savings; the 
consumer is often seen as a worker, a productive force; there is a 'reserve 
army' of needs analogous to the industrial reserve army); the ideas that 
apply to production are often extended to consumption. One of the most 
interesting of these extensions is Baudrillard's use of the concept of 
surplus value in reference to the distribution of welfare to the larger 
community. His contention is that society is expending part of its surplus 
in order to keep the public in line. Public munificence is seen as both a 
kind of ideological constraint (engendering a myth of service rather than 
a view of the world where everything is bought and sold) and a kind of 
social control. 

More importantly, for Marx, and interestingly still for Baudrillard in 
this work, production is accorded priority over consumption. There is 
still the sense in this work, both explicitly and implicitly, that production 
is the base and all else, including consumption and the culture of which 
it is such an integral part, is superstructure. This is clearly a limiting, if 
not a self-defeating, perspective in light of developments in both the 
social world and social theory. In terms of the latter, there is now a clear 



4 


The consumer society 


recognition of the independent importance, if not ascendancy, of culture 
and commodities. And few, even among diehard Marxian theorists, 
would subscribe to a limited base-superstructure argument . 7 

Beyond use-value, exchange-value, commodities, and base-super- 
structure, Baudrillard employs a rather lengthy litany of Marxian ideas 
in The Consumer Society. The concepts of ideology, commodity fetishism 
and reification clearly fit quite well into a Marxian approach to consump- 
tion. More generally, there is a great deal of dialectical thinking about, 
among other things, the contradictions that afflict consumer society 
(especially the inability of production to keep pace with the explosive 
growth of 'needs'; and the ideology of equality versus the increasing 
differentiation of consumer society). There is a sense that the tendency 
toward monopolization occurs not only in the world of production but 
also in the world of consumption. Even that old warhorse, alienation, is 
trotted out on occasion and, startlingly, is central to the title of the book's 
concluding chapter. There is talk of revolution, even a hope that con- 
sumption offers the possibility of 'deep crises', 'new contradictions', and 
even revolutionary change. However, in the end, Baudrillard's structur- 
alism, especially his interest in the immutability of the 'code', leads him 
to the view that no true revolution is possible. This is one of the many 
places in which Baudrillard's theoretical resources are at odds with one 
another and lead to a contradictory perspective on the consumer society. 
And this is one of the reasons why Baudrillard was soon to break with 
the Marxian tradition. Its optimistic view of the future was at logger- 
heads with his essentially pessimistic view of the world. 

Emile Durkheim is a second classical theorist whose ideas had a 
profound influence on this work. As we will see below, Baudrillard had 
at this point not yet abandoned sociology so it is not surprising that he 
should be drawn to Durkheim, the premier French classical sociological 
theorist. One important effect of this is that Baudrillard focuses his 
attention on collective phenomena, on Durkheimian social facts. Indeed, 
he describes consumption in very Durkheimian terms as 'collective 
behaviour', 'something enforced, a morality, an institution', and 'a whole 
system of values'. He fully recognized that lots of intellectual baggage 
went with such a perspective including a sense of the importance of 
group integration and social control . 8 Similarly, consumption from this 
Durkheimian perspective is seen not as enjoyment or pleasure, but 
rather as something which is institutionalized, forced upon us, a duty. 
While not inconsistent with Marx's thinking on reified social struc- 
tures, these ideas (collective, morality, values, duty, integration, institu- 
tions, social control) clearly have far more to do with Durkheim than 
with Marx. This is also true of the idea of socialization and the fact, 
underscored by Baudrillard, that we must be trained, we must learn, to 
consume. 

However, in modern society, the managed possession of consumer 



Introduction 


5 


goods is individualizing and atomizing. It leads to distinction and 
differentiation, not to social solidarity. Thus, modern consumption is at 
odds with the inherently collective nature of consumption. While even 
modern consumption is not totally individualistic, it is being pushed in 
that direction. Furthermore, production, like consumption, is viewed as a 
collective phenomenon. Thus, the pressure towards individualization in 
modern consumption is seen as being at odds with the nature of both 
production and consumption. 

Beyond his macroscopic or collective focus, throughout The Consumer 
Society Baudrillard does an incredible amount of Durkheimian function- 
alism . 9 In fact, given its macroscopic orientation and the functional 
analysis, the book sometimes reads as if it were written by a structural 
functionalist, a reality that can be traced to Baudrillard's continuing ties, 
at least at this point, to sociology. This orientation is made clear when, 
for example, Baudrillard critiques the general idea that waste within 
consumer society is dysfunctional 10 and argues for the need for socio- 
logical study that would show its true functions. He goes on to argue 
that it is wasteful, superfluous consumption that allows people and 
society to feel that they exist, that they are truly alive. In this sense, 
wasteful consumption is functional, not dysfunctional, and is analysable 
from the perspective of functional analysis. Similarly, he discusses the 
functionality of the fact that the heroes of production have been replaced 
by idols of consumption ('great wastrels') such as movie stars and sports 
heroes. It is they who fulfil the function of useless and inordinate 
expenditure. The Consumer Society is liberally studded with such func- 
tional analyses. One sometimes feels as if one is reading a work by a 
disciple of Talcott Parsons and not a book authored by someone whose 
work has become the antithesis of such mainstream sociology. While the 
signs of Baudrillard's rejection of that sociology, indeed all sociology, are 
to be found in this book, it also offers a considerable amount of the kind 
of sociology Baudrillard was to come to reject. 

Another central concept in Durkheimian theory - anomie - plays a 
central role in this work. Indeed, while the Conclusion deals with the 
Marxian concept of alienation, the immediately preceding chapter has 
'anomie' in its title. It is in this chapter that Baudrillard deals with 
various 'pathologies ' 11 associated with the consumer society such as the 
violence perpetrated in it, the non-violence of those like 'hippies', and 
the 'fatigue' (seen as a form of concealed protest) of many within 
consumer society. Durkheim, of course, deals with such pathologies 
within the context of a modern, reformist orientation in which he 
discusses a variety of ways (e.g. occupational associations) to cope with 
them. While Baudrillard is far more modern in this work than he was to 
come to be, he is still not nearly modern enough to offer reforms to deal 
with a system that he clearly regards as inherently and inevitably 
corrupt. 



6 


The consumer society 


Another major modern theorist of influence in The Consumer Society is 
Thorstein Veblen. This is somewhat surprising since Veblen has tended 
to be ignored by mainstream, modern theorists, but Baudrillard is drawn 
to him because of Veblen's pioneering work on consumption. Indeed, 
Veblen's image, as well as that of his famous concept of conspicuous 
consumption, is evoked by the opening line of the book which deals with 
the 'fantastic conspicuousness' of the wide array of consumer goods and 
services. Baudrillard not only usefully employs the notion of con- 
spicuous consumption, but also spins off some interesting ideas of his 
own from it. For example, while the middle classes continue to engage 
in conspicuous consumption, the elites may engage in new forms of 
inconspicuous consumption in order to create new and more subtle 
differences between themselves and the rest of society. Similarly, Veblen's 
arguments on conspicuous leisure are used to yield interesting insights 
into time and leisure. One of Baudrillard's conclusions is that it is 
impossible to waste time since in spending time in that way people are in 
fact producing something of value - prestige for themselves. Then, 
Baudrillard examines the 'benevolence' of things like advertisements 
where a 'free' television programme is offered in exchange for a few 
minutes of commercials. He sees this and things like it as conspicuous 
displays of disinterestedness. 

Yet, while he builds upon some of Veblen's ideas, Baudrillard ulti- 
mately finds them wanting. For example, he clearly critiques Veblen's 
orientation from the point of view of the structuralist perspective (see 
later) that is the true heart of The Consumer Society. Baudrillard rejects 
Veblen's concern with imitation, the study of prestige at the 'phenom- 
enal' level, and his concern with superficial conscious social dynamics. 
Instead, Baudrillard argues for the study of signs, structural relations, the 
code and, more generally, unconscious social logic. 

While outside the sociological mainstream, structuralism is certainly a 
modern perspective (it was the modern source of poststructuralism and 
to a lesser extent postmodernism). Furthermore, it was the dominant 
intellectual perspective in the France of Baudrillard's early years as a 
scholar. While the imprint of Marx is strong. The Consumer Society is most 
powerfully influenced by a range of structuralist ideas. This is made 
clear by the book's subtitle. Myths and Structures, and by much of the 
substance of the book. The world of consumption is treated like a mode 
of discourse, a language (and even, following Levi-Strauss, like a kinship 
system). As a language, consumption is a way in which we converse and 
communicate with one another. Once we think of consumption as a 
language, we are free to deploy the whole panoply of tools derived from 
structural linguistics including sign, signifier, signified and code. As a 
result, instead of Marxian use-values and exchange-values, consumables 
become sign-values. And it is this view of commodities that dominates 
this book, not the array of Marxian concepts which, while coexisting 
uncomfortably, are subordinated to them. 



Introduction 


7 


Baudrillard tries to relate the two theoretical perspectives that play the 
greatest role in undergirding his work by arguing that there are two 
entangled social orders - the order of production and the order of consump- 
tion. He still accords, at least overtly, the order of production priority, but 
recognizes that the logic of significations, and the order of production 
that goes with it, are of increasing importance. Whatever their relative 
significance, it is important that society be analysed from the perspective 
of both orders and their interrelationship. 

Later, Baudrillard puts this another way, arguing that consumption is 
constrained at two levels. One is the level of structural analysis where 
consumption is constrained by the constraint of signification. The other is 
the level of 'socio-economico-political' analysis in which the constraint of 
production is operant. Baudrillard could hardly be clearer: he is seeking to 
use both structuralist and traditional Marxian approaches . 12 However, he 
appears not to be trying to integrate them, but rather to have them 
operate side-by-side. For example, he argues that a true analysis of the 
social logic of consumption would focus not on the individual appro- 
priation of the use-value of goods and services, but rather on the 
production and manipulation of social signifiers. It is structural analysis 
that is deemed the appropriate approach to the latter issue . 13 Not only 
are the two theories not integrated, but Baudrillard already clearly 
privileges structuralism. Because structural analysis takes priority over 
Marxian theory, Baudrillard is ultimately unable to offer a theory of 
revolution. The code prevents real social revolution. That type that it 
does permit - fashion revolutions - not only are harmless but serve to 
prevent genuine social revolutions. 

When looked at from a structural perspective, what we consume is 
signs (messages, images) rather than commodities. This means that 
consumers need to be able to 'read' the system of consumption in order 
to know what to consume. Furthermore, because we all know the 'code', 
we know the meaning of the consumption of one commodity rather than 
another. Commodities are no longer defined by their use, but rather by 
what they signify. And what they signify is defined not by what they do, 
but by their relationship to the entire system of commodities and signs. 
There is an infinite range of difference available in this system and 
people therefore are never able to satisfy their need for commodities, for 
difference. It is this that in Baudrillard's view helps account for the 
seeming insatiability and continual dissatisfaction of consumers. And 
this, in turn, is one of the reasons for Baudrillard's dissatisfaction with 
the use of the concept of 'needs' - needs can, by definition, be satisfied 
and therefore cannot account for the insatiability of consumers. What 
people seek in consumption is not so much a particular object as 
difference and the search for the latter is unending. 

There is a sense that there is a series of structures that, in playing out 
their nature and relationship to one another, produce the consumer 
society. In contrast to a Marxian approach, there are no agents in such a 



8 


The consumer society 


structuralist orientation. For example, Baudrillard contends that the 
'system' maintains itself by producing wealth and poverty dissatisfac- 
tions and satisfactions, disturbances and progress. Furthermore, it is not 
deliberately bloodthirsty capitalists who are to blame for poverty, but 
rather the 'system' and its structures 'obeying its own laws'. 

To take another example, there is the issue of individual differentiation 
or personalization. The usual sociological approach to this topic is to 
think of individuals as consciously seeking to distinguish themselves 
from others. However, in Baudrillard's view, it is the code, or the system 
of differences, that causes individuals to be similar to, as well as different 
from, one another. In the very act of particularizing themselves, people 
are reading and conforming to the code. Baudrillard concludes that 
the sociological study of consumption (and everything else) must shift 
from the superficial level of conscious social dynamics to the un- 
conscious social logic of signs and the code. In other words, the key 
to understanding lies at the level of deep structures. It is those struc- 
tures that constrain people who are only able to decode messages 
unconsciously. 

Thus, structuralism represents the most powerful theoretical input into 
The Consumer Society. However, Baudrillard is already here a post- 
structuralist because he is supplementing structuralism with a series of 
other theoretical ideas derived from, among others, Marx, Durkheim, 
and Veblen. More generally, Baudrillard is still functioning as a soci- 
ologist and that further enriches (and complicates, even muddies) his 
analysis. In light of his later defection from, and acerbic remarks about, 
sociology, it is surprising to see Baudrillard employ sociology through- 
out this book. That involves not only utilization of a general sociological 
orientation, but more specific orientations such as the Durkheimian and 
functional analyses discussed earlier. 

Although he utilizes an essentially structuralist approach to the issues, 
the impact of being a sociologist is most obvious in Baudrillard's con- 
cern with, and analysis of, inequality, social differentiation and social 
stratification . 14 (Of course, there is no necessary contradiction between 
structuralism and sociology, there is a 'structuralist sociology', although 
Baudrillard criticizes sociologists for seeing individuals as free and 
creative and for being 'wary of "deep motivation"'.) For example, 
because of their training, the upper classes are seen as having some 
degree of mastery over the code. It is the middle and lower classes who 
are the true consumers because they lack such mastery. As a result, they 
fetishize objects and seek to prove themselves and to find salvation in the 
consumption of objects . 15 Baudrillard urges the abandonment of the 
'individual logic of satisfaction' (needs and so on) and a central focus on 
the 'social logic of differentiation '. 16 He argues that while 'primary 
penury' (a lack of goods) has largely been overcome in the modern 
world, 'structural penury' is built into the structure of modern growth 
society. That is, growth leads to privilege and that, in turn, leads to 



Introduction 


9 


penury for many, at least in comparison to the state of those with 
privilege. He concludes that society's social logic is condemning people 
to a luxurious and spectacular penury. Since the cause lies in the social 
logic, it can only be solved by a revolution at that level, a revolution that, 
given his commitment to structuralism, Baudrillard believes unlikely, if 
not impossible. 

There are times when Baudrillard adopts the perspective and mantle 
of sociologist (and structuralist) to critique the work of others. There is, 
for example, his critique of Galbraith for portraying individuals as 
passive victims and, in the process, ignoring sociological factors such as 
class, caste and social structure, as well as the more structural factor of 
the social logic of differentiation. In so doing, however, Baudrillard 
seems to be combining, perhaps more critically conflating, a structuralist 
approach ('the logic of differentiation') with a sociological orientation (to 
'class', 'caste', and 'social structure'). In fact, this conflation is a con- 
founding factor throughout the book. 

In spite of his seeming commitment to a sociological approach, 
Baudrillard critiques traditional sociologists, as he does the economist 
Galbraith, for focusing on individual needs for differentiation. He seems 
to often equate sociologists with 'psycho-sociologists' who focus on such 
individual, phenomenological matters . 17 Instead, Baudrillard supports a 
sociology that focuses on structures, especially the unconscious struc- 
tures of interest to structuralists. This can only be accomplished by 
abandoning the individual logic of satisfaction and according central 
importance to the social logic of differentiation. Thus, Baudrillard's 
support for sociology is, once again, support for a structural sociology. 
Indeed, he sometimes takes the position that sociology involves a focus 
on such structural issues as 'social logic'. While Baudrillard explicitly 
takes this position, we must not forget the many places in this work 
in which he does more conventional (i.e. Durkheimian, functional) 
analyses and focuses on such traditional sociological issues as social 
stratification. 


Intimations of Postmodernism 

While The Consumer Society has a number of modern characteristics, it 
also anticipates many of the ideas that one associates with Baudrillard's 
later work, ideas that have now become essential aspects of postmodern 
social theory. However, as we will see at the close of this Introduction, 
The Consumer Society is also assailable from a postmodern position 
because it is still embedded, at least in part, in a modern paradigm. 

While Baudrillard is already, for the reasons discussed above, a 
poststructuralist in The Consumer Society, it is clear why even that 
designation will come to be an uncomfortable, even an inappropriate, 
label to describe his orientation. The fact is that there is an uncomfortable 



10 


The consumer society 


and unstable mix of theoretical ideas in The Consumer Society. It seems 
clear in retrospect that the only option open to Baudrillard was to leave 
most of them behind and create a theoretical perspective unlike any that 
had come before. Many of the elements of that theory at least in a 
rudimentary form, are to be found in The Consumer Society, but they do 
not yet come together to form a distinctive theoretical orientation. That 
had to await later theoretical work and intellectual development. 

Let me begin with Baudrillard's privileging of primitive over modern 
society, as well as the concept of symbolic exchange, ideas which were to 
be more fully developed in later works, especially Symbolic Exchange and 
Death (1976/1993). It is clear that Baudrillard is critical of modern 
society 18 and that critique emanates from a sense of the importance of the 
symbolic, especially symbolic exchange, as it exists, in part, in primitive 
society and more generally in an abstract model of such an exchange 
process. There are many places in which Baudrillard offers a critique of 
modern practices in light of what they were like in more primitive 
society. For example, communication, especially through the mass 
media, has a 'technical, aseptic' form and 'is no longer achieved through a 
symbolic medium'; it lacks 'real symbolic or didactic processes'. In modern 
society people display a kind of 'ludic curiosity' about things; they 'play 
with combinations'. What is lost is 'passionate play', with passion 
implying total involvement and intense symbolic value. Modern con- 
sumption involves the external manipulation of signs and it lacks, 
among other things, the symbolic values involved in creation. 

This aspect of Baudrillard's thinking is also well illustrated by what he 
has to say about time. Our modern sense of time, especially as something 
to be used, even wasted, in leisure is a product of our culture and 
economic system. Thus, time becomes a commodity like any other, albeit 
one that is rarer and more precious, in the consumer society. It can be 
exchanged with any other commodity, especially money. Leisure time is 
separated from work time and one is obligated, constrained to spend it. 
This all stands in stark contrast to Baudrillard's view of primitive society 
where there is no time; where it is meaningless to ask whether or not one 
has time. Time in this context is nothing more than the rhythm of 
collective activities, especially the rituals of eating and feasting. It is 
impossible to dissociate time from such activities, or to plan or manip- 
ulate time. Time in primitive societies is integral to symbolic exchange. 

Waste is another area in which Baudrillard seeks to contrast modern 
and primitive society and to privilege the primitive form of waste. In 
the primitive world, waste is a festive ritual and a symbolic act of 
expenditure. However, in the modern world it has become a bureaucratic 
caricature in which wasteful consumption is obligatory. Baudrillard's 
overall position on the transition from primitive to modern society is that 
the fundamental characteristic of the latter is the loss of spontaneous, 
reciprocal, and symbolic human relations. 

In this light, Baudrillard's discussion of the work of the anthropologist 



Introduction 


11 


Marshall Sahlins on hunting-gathering societies is quite relevant and 
instructive. Baudrillard uses Sahlins's work not only to privilege prim- 
itive society, but also as one of many bases to critique Galbraith's ideas 
on the affluent society. Baudrillard argues, following Sahlins, that prim- 
itive societies can be seen as affluent while modern 'industrial and 
productivist' societies are 'dominated by scarcity'. 

Hunter-gatherers like those of the Kalahari suffered from absolute 
poverty in the sense that they had few, if any, personal possessions. They 
did no 'work' in the contemporary sense of the term, made no economic 
calculations and did not amass a store of goods. They shared everything 
they did have with other members of the group and were confident (or 
foolish) enough to consume everything immediately. They managed to 
rest easy because they trusted in the abundance of natural resources. In 
contrast, modern society is characterized by anxiety and despair about a 
variety of insufficiencies. As a result, it was because they knew true 
affluence that the hunter-gatherers could afford to be what we would 
consider improvident. 

To Baudrillard, following Sahlins, poverty involves not the quantity of 
goods a group possesses, but the nature of its human relationships. In 
the case of primitive hunter-gatherers there are transparent and recip- 
rocal human relationships. There is no accumulation or monopolization 
of raw materials, technologies, or products that would serve to interfere 
with free exchange and lead to scarcity. What there is, and what is the 
source of their wealth, is symbolic exchange. Wealth is based not on 
goods but on human exchange; and, since the latter is endless, wealth is 
unlimited. The small number of goods that do exist create general wealth 
because they circulate continually among the members of the group. 

While these primitive societies bask in the 'wealth' of the dialectic of 
human relationships, modern societies are characterized by the 'dialectic 
of penury'. In a society characterized by such a dialectic there is 
unlimited and insatiable need; a constant sense that one does not have 
enough. Rather than a reciprocal sharing of what people have, modern 
society is characterized by differentiation and competition which con- 
tributes to the reality and the sense that there is never enough. Since the 
problem lies in social relationships (or in the social logic), it will not be 
solved by increases in production, by innovations in productive forces, 
or by what we usually think of as even greater abundance. The only 
solution to the problem lies in a change in social relationships and in the 
social logic. We need a social logic that brings with it the affluence of 
symbolic exchange, rather than one that condemns us to 'luxurious and 
spectacular penury'. This is an attractive (structural) sociological argu- 
ment, although one wonders how Baudrillard thinks such a revolution is 
to come about since he has given up hope in a Marxian-style revolution 
and in a revolutionary agent. Later we will see how he seeks to deal with 
this problem. 



12 


The consumer society 


Another concept that is apparent throughout The Consumer Society is 
simulations. As was the case with the notion of symbolic exchange, it too 
was later to become a focal concern, as well as the title, of a book 
(Baudrillard, 1983/1990). The concept of a simulation makes sense when 
one looks at it in light of Baudrillard's thinking on symbolic exchange 
and the privileging of primitive society. For example, in primitive society 
nature is seen as an original and specific presence which stands in 
contrast to culture. However, in the modern world nature has tended to 
be reduced to something carefully groomed, managed, policed and 
tailored to the needs of humans. Nature in this form is a simulation of 
what it is in primitive society. It has become a sham; simulations can be 
defined as 'sham objects' and it is such objects that define our consumer 
society. They are objects that offer an abundance of signs that they are 
real, but in fact they are not. 

Another major example of simulations is found in Baudrillard's dis- 
cussion of kitsch - 'trashy objects', 'folksy knick-knacks', 'souvenirs'. 
These are defined by Baudrillard as pseudo-objects not to be confused 
with 'real' objects. Kitsch can also be defined as objects which, while they 
have a superabundance of signs, lack any real signification. The popu- 
larity of kitsch is closely tied to the development of a mass-production 
market and society. Rather than an aesthetics of 'beauty and originality', 
kitsch offers an aesthetics of simulation, of objects that reproduce, 
imitate, ape, and repeat. Yet another type of simulation is the gadget, a 
useless, impoverished object which simulates a function without having 
any real, practical referent. As such, the gadget is part of a broader 
process (growing numbers of useless, simulated objects) affecting society 
as a whole. As a result, all of society is suspected of uselessness, 
artificiality and fakery. More specifically, we act with gadgets in a ludic 
rather than a symbolic or utilitarian manner and this, too, is only part of 
a broader process since the curious play with combinations is coming to 
characterize more and more aspects of society. In other words, the world 
is coming to be increasingly dominated by simulations and we are 
reduced to playing with them rather than using them, or relating to 
them, symbolically. 

Baudrillard argues that the mass media have greatly enhanced and 
generalized the simulation process. Instead of reality, people are treated 
to simulations involving the constant recombination of various signs, of 
elements of the code. Baudrillard has a problem here, and elsewhere, 
because lacking an Archimedean point, he cannot (or, at least, should 
not) label these simulations as false. Thus, he designates them 'neo- 
reality' because he recognizes that we need to find a way of avoiding 
using language which speaks of the 'false' and the 'artificial'. Yet, in 
other places that is just what Baudrillard does, as, for example, when he 
labels simulations 'sham objects'. 19 

Modern society is characterized not only by simulated objects, but also 



Introduction 


13 


by simulated relationships. For example, advertisers are seen as imitat- 
ing intimate, personal modes of communication in an effort to produce a 
sense of intimacy where, in fact, none exists. A simulated intimacy is 
created between people doing the advertising and potential customers, 
as well as between the latter and the products being advertised. This is 
but one part of what Baudrillard sees as a generalized game of human 
relations. Instead of the reciprocity characteristic of primitive societies 
and symbolic exchange, in modern society we have a gigantic simulation 
model of such reciprocal human relations. 

More specifically, consumer society is one in which most of us are 
obliged to be solicitous of others. However, it is a simulated solicitous- 
ness which is forced, bureaucratized and counterfeit. As a result, we find 
ourselves surrounded by emotions and personal relations that are care- 
fully orchestrated. Many of those we interact with are instructed to keep 
smiling and to be sure to tell us to 'Have a nice day.' 

Symbolic exchange and simulations are two of a number of concepts 
that make their appearance, at least in rudimentary form, in The Con- 
sumer Society, concepts destined for further development in Baudrillard's 
later work. Other such ideas include the referendum, the examination, 
the ludic, cancerous and ecstatic growth, Americanism (Baudrillard, 
1986/1989), fatality, and so on. The last concept which, like symbolic 
exchange and simulations, was fated to become part of the title of a later 
book by Baudrillard (1983/1990), makes one of its appearances at the 
close of The Consumer Society. It constitutes Baudrillard's way of deal- 
ing with the issue of how a revolution is to come about without a 
revolutionary subject rationally bringing it to fruition. In his view, the 
revolution will occur because it is fated to happen, just as the fabled and 
formative (for Baudrillard) student rebellion of 1968 was destined to 
come about in France. 

It is not surprising that Baudrillard anticipated many of his own ideas 
in The Consumer Society. What is surprising is the degree to which it 
anticipated later postmodern concerns with such issues as time, space, 
sexuality and the body. The latter two ideas are more associated with the 
work of Michel Foucault, but Baudrillard was already dealing with them 
in his early work. 20 Naturally, he examines both through the lens of 
consumption. 

The body emerges as something that can be used to sell commodities 
and services as well as being itself a consumed object. In order to be used 
as an object to sell things, the body must be 'rediscovered' by its 'owner' 
and viewed narcissistically rather than merely functionally. Once the 
body is seen in this way, people are free to adorn it with objects and to 
pamper and seek to improve it with a variety of services. In other words, 
people are free to consume goods and services on behalf of the body and 
capitalists are free to produce and market all manner of goods and 
services (suntan lotions and exercise regimens, for example) aimed at the 
body. However, Baudrillard contends that it is not bodily drives that are 



14 


The consumer society 


liberated in this way, but merely the drive to buy more goods and 
services. Thus, the body, like labour power in Marxian theory, must first 
be liberated (at least as a factor in consumption) so that it can then be 
exploited . 21 

Once 'liberated' as an object, the body takes its place in the system of 
objects. However, it is not merely one of the mass of objects to be 
manipulated and consumed, it is the 'finest' of those objects. People have 
come to make increasingly great psychological investments in their 
bodies; in Marxian terms they have come to fetishize their bodies. The 
body has become the object that people lavish more attention and money 
on than any other object. We have become consumers of our own bodies 
and as such we consume a wide variety of goods and services in order to 
enhance them. Baudrillard argues that a historical transformation has 
taken place and instead of seeking salvation through the soul we have 
come to seek salvation through the body. The latter is evident, among 
other places, in the therapies, treatments, regimes and sacrifices asso- 
ciated with the body. 

Closely tied to the issue of the body, especially its beauty, is that of 
sexuality. Baudrillard addresses, as Foucault was to later, the explosion 
of interest in sexuality. What concerns Baudrillard, however, is the role 
played by sexuality in the consumer society. Not only does sexuality 
tinge everything that is offered for consumption, but sexuality is itself 
offered for consumption. There are at least two main reasons for the 
centrality of sexuality in consumer society. On the one hand, and most 
obviously, sex sells and it is used to sell myriad objects and services. On 
the other hand, and perhaps more profound, is the fact that sexuality is 
expressed in consumption so that it will not become a force to disrupt 
and perhaps overthrow the existing social order. Thus, Baudrillard 
differentiates between eroticism as a domain of signs and exchange and 
the more basic and 'genuine' human desire. In the consumer society 
eroticism in its more commercial form comes to predominate and it 
serves to control and subvert the explosive potential of desire . 22 


Consumption 

While from both a prospective and a retrospective point of view The 
Consumer Society is fascinating theoretically and metatheoretically, it is 
clearly above all a work about consumption. While we have already 
touched on a number of issues relating to consumption, Baudrillard's 
thoughts on that process will concern us more directly in this section. 
Unfortunately, it is no easy matter to unravel what Baudrillard means by 
consumption. It is not that he does not try to define the concept, rather it 
is that he defines it in many different ways, perhaps because of the many 
different theoretical inputs into this work. 

To Baudrillard, consumption is not merely a frenzy of buying a 



Introduction 


15 


profusion of commodities, a function of enjoyment, an individual func- 
tion, liberating of needs, fulfilling of the self, affluence, or the consump- 
tion of objects. Consumption is an order of significations in a 'panoply' of 
objects; a system, or code, of signs; 'an order of the manipulation of 
signs'; the manipulation of objects as signs; a communication system 
(like a language); a system of exchange (like primitive kinship); a 
morality, that is a system of ideological values; a social function; a 
structural organization; a collective phenomenon; the production of 
differences; 'a generalization of the combinatorial processes of fashion'; 
isolating and individualizing; an unconscious constraint on people, both 
from the sign system and from the socio-economico-political system; and 
a social logic. 

If one tries to summarize all of the things that consumption is and is 
not, it seems clear that to Baudrillard consumption is not, contrary to 
conventional wisdom, something that individuals do and through which 
they find enjoyment, satisfaction and fulfilment. Rather, consumption is a 
structure (or Durkheimian social fact) that is external to and coercive 
over individuals. While it can and does take the forms of a structural 
organization, a collective phenomenon, a morality, it is above all else a 
coded system of signs. Individuals are coerced into using that system. 
The use of that system via consumption is an important way in which 
people communicate with one another. The ideology associated with the 
system leads people to believe, falsely in Baudrillard's view, that they are 
affluent, fulfilled, happy and liberated. 

In the modern consumer society we consume not only goods, but also 
human services and therefore human relationships. People involved in 
those services are, as mentioned earlier, very solicitous of us. However, it 
is through such solicitousness that they serve to pacify us. Thus, pacifica- 
tion is added to the constraint and repression of the system and the code. 
Ultimately, what is being consumed in the consumer society is consump- 
tion itself. The last point is best exemplified by advertising. In watching 
or reading advertisements people are consuming them; they are consum- 
ing consumption. 

Baudrillard seeks to extend consumption from goods not only to 
services, but to virtually everything else. In his view, 'anything can 
become a consumer object.' As a result, 'consumption is laying hold of 
the whole of life.' What this communicates is the idea that consumption 
has been extended to all of culture; we are witnessing the commodifica- 
tion of culture. This, in turn, leads to one of the basic premises of 
postmodernism - the erosion of the distinction between high and low 
culture. Art, for example, has increasingly become indistinguishable 
from any other commodity. A good example is the production and sale of 
a large number of numbered prints. These mass-produced works of art 
become commodities like all others and are therefore valued in the same 
way as other commodities. They are evaluated in a relative manner 
within the same system of objects as, for example, Levi's jeans or 



16 


The consumer society 


McDonald's hamburgers. Art, jeans and burgers all acquire their mean- 
ing and their value relative to one another as well as to the entire system 
of consumer objects. A work of art is now consumed in the same way as, 
say, a washing machine. Indeed, they (or at least their signs) are 
substitutable for one another. Ultimately, cultural objects are subjected to 
the same demand for signs as all other commodities and they come to be 
created in order to satisfy that demand. Art, and culture more generally, 
come to be subject to the fashion cycle. Instead of being part of a process 
of symbolic exchange, art (like much else in the modern world) becomes 
just one more 'ludic and combinatorial practice'. Art is thus abolished by 
consumer society, but Baudrillard holds to the dream of an art that, 
instead of being in the thrall of consumer society, would be able to 
decipher it. 

Pop art comes under Baudrillard's special scrutiny. Pop is a type of art 
that fits well within a society dominated by the logic of signs and 
consumption. Pop art is a system which produces 'art' objects that 
become just some of many 'sign objects' within the realm of consump- 
tion. It is virtually impossible to see pop art as high culture and to 
distinguish it from low culture. Indeed, one of the major subjects of pop 
artists is low culture as represented in Andy Warhol's work on Campbell 
soup cans and Marilyn Monroe. Art, or at least pop art, has ceased to be 
creative or subversive; it is merely one more set of objects to be included 
in the system of objects. It no longer creates or contradicts the world of 
consumer objects; 23 it is part of that world. 

Within his body of thought on consumption, and often ignored 
because it does not fit well with his primary focus on signs, sign systems 
and the code, is Baudrillard's innovative ideas on the 'means of con- 
sumption'. Here is a term that is obviously derived from Marx's sense of 
the means of production 24 and it has a similar material connotation. In 
that sense, it runs counter to the main thrust of Baudrillard's work with 
its focus on signs and sign systems. The concept's existence is reflective, 
yet again, of the theoretical tension that exists within The Consumer 
Society. While clearly most influenced by structuralism and moving in a 
poststructuralist and ultimately postmodernist direction, Baudrillard is 
still influenced by Marxian theory in general and, in this case, by 
Marx's thinking on the material means of production such as tools, raw 
materials, labour power, technologies and factories. The means of con- 
sumption discussed throughout The Consumer Society are similarly 
material phenomena. 25 

Baudrillard's paradigm of the means of consumption was the French, 
especially the Parisian, drugstore. This was different from its modern 
American counterpart; it was more like a mini department store or 
shopping centre (indeed, Baudrillard appears to equate the shopping 
centre and the drugstore). As a paradigm, the drugstore can become a 
whole community as it does in Parly 2 with its gigantic shopping centre, 
swimming-pool, clubhouse and housing development. The shopping 



Introduction 


17 


centre, indeed the entire community, can be seen as the 'drugstore writ 
large'. In addition to drugstores, shopping centres, and planned com- 
munities, Baudrillard also mentions ski resorts. Club Med and airports 
under the broad heading of the new means of consumption. Also 
discussed in this context is the credit card. 26 

Baudrillard actually does relatively little with these new means of 
consumption given his primary interest in the non-material signs asso- 
ciated with consumer society. However, he was quite prescient in recog- 
nizing the importance of these phenomena at this early stage in their 
development. While from a contemporary American, and even global, 
point of view he may have picked the wrong paradigm (drugstores), 
since the time that Baudrillard wrote we have witnessed a massive 
expansion in the number and significance of the new means of consump- 
tion. The shopping centres, or malls, that he mentions have become a 
major presence. The credit card, as well as derivatives like the ATM and 
debit card, have undergone meteoric expansion. Ski resorts and Club 
Med have expanded, but to them should be added the far more import- 
ant cruise ships. Las Vegas-like casino/hotels, and theme parks like 
Disney World or Euro Disney (in Baudrillard's France). Among the new 
means of consumption not mentioned by Baudrillard, but clearly part of 
the same domain, are fast-food restaurants (Ritzer, 1996), home shopping 
television networks, and cybermalls. 

I have come to think of the new means of consumption as 'fantastic 
cages'. That is, they combine the material reality of Marx's means of 
consumption (or better Weber's iron cage) with a fantasy world of goods 
and services (Williams, 1982). While Baudrillard does not describe the 
means of consumption in these terms, there is support in his work for 
such a perspective. For example, he contends that affluence and con- 
sumption are both lived as myth and endured as objective processes. 
More generally, in addition to its constraining effect, consumption is 
described by Baudrillard as a magical, miraculous, fantastic world. 27 The 
new means of consumption offer the consumer fantastic, mythical 
images (signs) and they are objective structures that constrain the behav- 
iour of consumers. 

These new means of consumption are not only important as sites 
within which people consume signs, but also important in their own 
right as structures that lead people to consume more and different 
things. In that sense, they are consistent with Baudrillard's concern with 
constraint throughout The Consumer Society. Terms like 'totalitarian', 
'omnipotent', 'tyrannical', 'repressive' and 'terroristic' are frequently 
applied to the system of signs, the code, the consumer society, the media, 
leisure, affluence and so on. Baudrillard's world is characterized by not 
only obligatory consumption, but also obligatory leisure. However, there 
is also a sense here that society, as successful as it has been in its effort to 
control people, is doomed to ultimate failure. It cannot forestall the 



18 


The consumer society 


violent and non-violent (e.g. of 'hippies') reactions against consumer 
society. These reactions are 'fated' to occur. 

While there is much criticism here of consumer society, Baudrillard is 
at pains to differentiate his position from that of mainstream critics such 
as Galbraith. He sees mainstream criticisms as an 'anti-discourse' which, 
along with the discourse in praise of consumption, creates the great myth 
of consumption in modern society. That counter-discourse focuses on the 
problems associated with consumer society and the tragedy to which it 
dooms society. However, to Baudrillard, both the counter-discourse and 
the positive discourse are part of the code and as such they both serve to 
reinforce it. Baudrillard appears to believe 28 that he avoids this problem, 
perhaps because his main target is the code rather than consumption per 
se. It is the code and its constraints that are the problem. They cannot be 
attacked through efforts to mobilize people to revolt against them. We 
are back to Baudrillard's fatal world and the only hope there is: a 
reaction that cannot be rationally mobilized; a reaction that is unforeseen 
but nonetheless certain. 


Conclusion 

The Consumer Society is a significant piece of social theory. The English- 
speaking world will find an intellectual banquet in this translation. Let 
me iterate the reasons why I think this is a superior contribution to social 
theory. 

First, it is relatively timeless. Yes, there are a few things that date the 
book, but in the main the book reads as well today as it must have in 
1970. Furthermore, it is a book that will prove to be relevant, if not 
required, reading for decades to come, for as long as consumerism is a 
dominant aspect of the social world. Since consumerism is apt to 
accelerate in the coming years, decades, even centuries, this book will be 
of continuing relevance. 

Second, it is of general, if not universal, significance. This is not a book 
about France; it reads at least as well from the context of American 
society. Indeed, it is relevant to any society in the thrall of consumerism, 
or which is moving inexorably in that direction. 

Third, it made a radical break with the productivist orientation that 
predominated in the France of the day. This was a difficult break for any 
French social thinker interested in the economy and even more difficult 
for Baudrillard because he was operating, at least in part, from the 
overwhelmingly productivist Marxian perspective. Interestingly, today, 
almost three decades after the publication of The Consumer Society, much 
of the academic world, especially in the United States, has still not made 
the transition made almost three decades ago by Baudrillard. This is 
especially true of American sociology and social theory, both of which 
remain firmly embedded in a productivist paradigm. Thus, while there 



Introduction 


19 


are well-established subfields like industrial sociology, the sociology of 
work, and the sociology of occupations, there is no subfield in the United 
States devoted to the sociology of consumption. It is stunning that such a 
contention can be made about a sociology at the centre of the world of 
consumption as it approaches the millennium, but that is the reality. 

Fourth, the book shows a theorist (and a theory) in transition, one who 
is in the midst of struggling, sometimes unsatisfactorily, with a series of 
often incompatible theoretical perspectives. With the benefit of hindsight 
we can now see not only where Baudrillard was coming from, but where 
he was ultimately to go. Indeed, we can see where Baudrillard had to go 
given the tensions and predilections found in The Consumer Society. 

Fifth, it shows a theorist at work who is sensitive both to the most 
important classical and contemporary theories and to the most important 
social issues of the day. 

Sixth, this is a work that can be read profitably today for theoretical 
perspectives and ideas that can help us to think better about the 
consumer society. One example, of particular importance to me, is the 
idea of the (new) means of consumption. This, as we've seen, is almost a 
throwaway idea in The Consumer Society, one that is little developed by 
Baudrillard, but it is one that I think is worthy of much greater 
exploration. There are many such ideas in this book, and that says 
nothing of the central ideas (e.g. simulation) that have already proven of 
great utility to many observers of the social world. 

This is important social theory, but it is also flawed, perhaps even 
deeply so. While from one angle there is theoretical richness to be found 
here, from another a range of theoretical perspectives can be seen as 
coexisting uncomfortably. As we have seen, this book draws upon Marx 
(and Marxian theory), Durkheim, Veblen, structuralism, and sociology in 
general. There is even some Freudian theory thrown into the mix, 
although Freudian ideas play far less of a role here than they did in The 
System of Objects. The coexistence of a number of theoretical perspectives, 
without any effort to integrate them, creates a number of problems, 
many of which have been pointed out previously. Thus, the materialism 
of a Marxian perspective and its concern for things like the means of 
production and consumption coexists uncomfortably with the (linguistic) 
structuralism that leads Baudrillard to accord much greater import- 
ance to such non-material phenomena as signs. In the end, of course, 
Baudrillard privileges the latter over the former, but the issue of 
the relationship between material and non-material phenomena is un- 
explored and unresolved. 

There is considerable confusion about Baudrillard's views on the 
sociological perspective and how it relates to structuralism. On the one 
hand, Baudrillard is critical of sociology which he often associates with 
psycho-sociology. On the other hand, Baudrillard often explicitly does 
sociological analyses. At times they are quite straightforwardly socio- 
logical, such as when he analyses inequality and social stratification, or 



20 


The consumer society 


when he does one of his functional analyses. However, at other times he 
is, in fact, doing structural analysis when he says he is operating from a 
sociological perspective. For example, he often uses the term 'sociology' 
when he analyses, as he frequently does, the 'logic' of the social system. 
Yet, it most often seems that he is thinking of something like the 
structuralist's code when he is dealing with social logic. The fact is that 
much of this is quite muddy and he is clearly conflating a range of 
theoretical perspectives. 

Relatedly, while Baudrillard has been able to move from production to 
consumption, a productivist bias continues to haunt this work. There is 
often a clear sense that production continues to retain its primacy over 
consumption. Furthermore, as pointed out previously, Baudrillard is 
often led to make some highly questionable analogies between produc- 
tion and consumption. Part of the reason for this is that Baudrillard had 
yet to part company with Marxian theory and its productivism. Another 
part, however, may have been that France of the late 1960s was a society 
still dominated by production; the shift in emphasis to consumption was 
in its earliest stages. As we approach the new millennium, the centrality 
of consumption over production is far clearer in France, the United States 
and other developed nations. 

Furthermore, many of the ideas to be explored and fleshed out 
dramatically in later works - especially simulations and symbolic 
exchange - exist here in their rudimentary forms. This is clearly an early 
work in a career that was to lead to much more fully developed 
theorizing in the coming years. Thus, for example, one would probably 
miss the full implications of symbolic exchange were it not for know- 
ledge of Baudrillard's later work. Indeed, it is clear that Baudrillard is 
only at the early stages of exploring these and other ideas and is himself 
only dimly aware of their full implications. 

On the other hand, this early work bears none of the arrogant 
disregard for academic canons that characterizes his most recent work. In 
The Consumer Society Baudrillard is clearly working hard at the academic 
craft. He is reading the relevant literature, adopting its useful insights, 
critiquing its weaknesses and using all of it, as well as a sensitive eye 
towards the social world, to develop his theoretical ideas. While The 
Consumer Society is not nearly as important, at least theoretically, as say 
Symbolic Exchange and Death, it is far better and far more important than 
works like Cool Memories (1980-5/1990) or America (1986/1989). 

Finally, it is worth critiquing this work from a postmodern perspective. 
From that point of view, itself heavily influenced by Baudrillard's later 
work. The Consumer Society is clearly still mired, at least to some degree, 
in a modern paradigm; it has all of the modernist characteristics dis- 
cussed earlier. But rather than rehash all of those from a postmodern 
perspective, let me emphasize the point that this book is dominated by 
that bete noire of postmodernists, a grand narrative. Fundamentally, and 
in many different ways, Baudrillard paints a picture of a world that has 



Introduction 


21 


fallen from the glories of primitive society and the symbolic exchange 
that characterizes it. 29 During the industrial era, symbolic exchange was 
replaced by exchange dominated by use-values and exchange-values. 
When Baudrillard was writing this book, he clearly felt that we had 
moved into an era dominated by the exchange of sign-values. 30 However 
he describes the period in which he was writing, it comes off badly in 
comparison with primitive society and its symbolic exchange. While the 
terms are different, this is precisely the kind of grand narrative that 
postmodernists such as Lyotard (1979/1984) have lambasted. In addition 
to all of the other examples discussed previously, the following are just a 
few of the other ways in which Baudrillard expressed this grand 
narrative: the loss of spontaneous, symbolic human relations; more and 
more of society falling under the logic of signs and the code; the 
substitution of ludic and combinatorial practices with cultural signs for 
culture as a symbolic system; the achievement of communion through 
technical rather than symbolic means; sexuality as a spectre rather 
than as symbolic rejoicing and exchange; and the loss of authentic 
relationships. 

In the years that followed, Baudrillard actually clarified and extended 
this grand narrative. However, most recently, his work has become more 
obscure and elusive on this issue, and many other issues. Nonetheless, a 
good portion of it remains embedded in a grand narrative much like the 
one described above. Of course, a critique of Baudrillard from a post- 
modern perspective may be dismissed by him since he generally rejects 
the designation of a postmodernist and refuses to use the term. 

Another criticism of The Consumer Society may be traced to the fact that 
Baudrillard was in the process of transforming himself into less of a 
modernist and more of a postmodernist. Baudrillard is clearly trying to 
distance himself from the modern tendency to develop an Archimedean 
point (such as Marx's species being) from which to criticize society. 
However, while he may be making such an effort at an overt level, he 
seems to implicitly employ such an Archimedean point, symbolic 
exchange, throughout this book and ensuing works. Thus, Baudrillard 
had not yet shaken off his modernist inclinations and they were to 
continue to influence his work for some years to come. 

As a result of his Archimedean point, Baudrillard is led into a number 
of other problematic positions. For example, he is uniformly positive 
about primitive society. He fails to see anything wrong with it and, more 
generally, with symbolic exchange. For another, he fails to see anything 
positive about, or right with, modern (or postmodern) consumer society. 
He is unremittingly critical of that society. An even slightly more 
balanced portrait of both primitive and modern societies would have 
enhanced Baudrillard's analysis. 

As we turn Baudrillard's work around in our minds, it is clear that it 
has many flaws from many different perspectives. Yet, what important 
work in social theory is flawless? In exploring the weaknesses we must 



22 


The consumer society 


not lose sight of the fact that The Consumer Society is a significant 
contribution to social theory, and Jean Baudrillard demonstrates here 
something that was to become even clearer as his work progressed in the 
ensuing decade or so - that he is a major social theorist. 


Notes 

1 The other major possibility would be Michel Foucault, but he is perhaps better 
thought of as a poststructuralist than as a postmodernist. Baudrillard eschews the post- 
structural label and Foucault abhorred all attempts to label him. 

2 I am using this term to mean those who take sociological theory as a subject of study 
(Ritzer, 1991). 

3 There are a few exceptions; a few things that do date the book. Examples include the 
discussion of a now-forgotten 1960s radio quiz show, Brigitte Bardot as a paradigm of 
female beauty, and the hippies and their rejection of modem consumer society. 

4 He had dealt with it in greater detail in his previous book. The System of Objects 
(1968/1996). He also dealt with consumption, both directly and indirectly, in this earlier 
work, but in nothing like the detail in which it was to be analysed in The Consumer 
Society. 

5 Two exceptions are Expressing America: A Critique of the Global Credit Card Society 
(Ritzer, 1995) and Credit Card Nation: America's Dangerous Addiction to Consumer Debt 
(Manning and Williams, 1996). 

6 Although his name is rarely mentioned, I think the most powerful presence is 
Ferdinand de Saussure and the structuralism and structural linguistics he played such a 
central role in creating. 

7 Fredric Jameson (1991) is one postmodernist who is often accused of this. 

8 Consumption is also described as a system of communication, but while this idea 
too can be traced to Durkheim, it is better associated with other theoretical inputs into his 
work (see later). 

9 Of course, there are those who see a great deal of functional thinking in Marx's work 
(e.g. Cohen, 1978/1986). 

10 While he is doing functional analyses, there is no clear indication that Baudrillard 
had read Merton (1968) and his work on the functional paradigm. 

11 Other pathologies dealt with by Baudrillard are a series of environmental 'nuisances' 
(air, water and noise pollution), cultural 'nuisances' (like grim housing developments, 
planned obsolescence, insecure employment), as well as poverty. 

12 There is, of course, a Marxian strand of structuralism (Althusser, Poulantzas, etc.). 

13 To this he adds a more sociological analysis of social differentiation and stratifica- 
tion. And this has both a lived and a structural aspect. As a result of the latter, people are 
permanently controlled by a code that they are, in the main, unable to fathom. 

14 In Chapter 4, note 1, Baudrillard seems to acknowledge that there is a difference 
between a modem (presumably including modern sociology) and a structural approach to 
inequality. 

15 Using a more sociological approach, Baudrillard also argues that the lower classes 
engage in consumption in an effort to compensate for their lack of upward mobility. 

16 The key here is the notion of 'social logic' which Baudrillard clearly intends in a 
structural sense, but also associates with a sociological approach. 

17 Baudrillard also critiques psycho-sociologists for being part of the service sector and 
for being interested in solving social problems by being therapists involved in dealing with 
communication problems. 

18 At this stage in his work, Baudrillard never discusses postmodern society. While the 
term 'postmodern' had some early precursors, and C. Wright Mills had used it as early as 
1959, it was not to begin to be used widely until the 1970s. 



Introduction 


23 


19 To take another example, he contends that desire is the truth of the body, implying 
that the body's modern sexuality or eroticism is false. 

20 The body had come under Foucault's scrutiny in the Birth of the Clinic (1963/1975), 
but sexuality was not to become a focal concern until The History of Sexuality (1978/1980). 

21 This is one of the many places in this work where Baudrillard remains locked in a 
Marxian perspective, causing him, among other things, to make a series of analogies 
between consumption and production. This is one of the key areas in which it is 
abundantly clear that Marxian theory is at least as much of a hindrance as it is a help to 
Baudrillard. It is this kind of tension that sets the stage for Baudrillard's later abandonment 
of a Marxian perspective. 

22 Although Baudrillard does not explicitly make the point, desire would predominate 
in a society characterized by symbolic exchange. 

23 The implication, once again, is that art in primitive society, in symbolic exchange, 
would play such a contradictory role. 

24 In fact, Marx (1981: 471) used the term 'means of consumption' and distinguished it 
from 'means of production'. The former are commodities that enter individual consump- 
tion (as necessities or luxuries), while the latter enter productive consumption. However, 
Marx is not using 'means of consumption' as it is employed by Baudrillard and here to 
mean structures that serve to make consumption possible. They are to Marx consumer 
goods used by the proletariat (means of subsistence) and the capitalist (luxuries). 

25 Although they can be seen as signs themselves (McDonald's, Burger King and 
Wendy's are part of the sign system that is the fast-food industry) as well as settings which 
permit people to consume signs. 

26 Credit cards might better be seen as 'meta-means of consumption', facilitating the 
use of means of consumption such as shopping malls and ski resorts. 

27 Although it is a simulated fantasy world since truly meaningful dreamwork is in 
Baudrillard's view no longer possible. Yet again, the presumption is that truly meaningful 
dreamwork is only possible in primitive societies and/or those characterized by symbolic 
exchange. 

28 Obviously, this author is dubious about Baudrillard's belief that he avoided falling 
into the trap that ensnared Galbraith and others. 

29 It is interesting to note that Baudrillard (1968/1996: 54) had earlier noted his 
resistance to the idea of romanticizing the past. 

30 Baudrillard (1976/1993; 1983/1990; 1990/1993) is later more explicit about this 
historical model and takes it further. 


References 

Baudrillard, Jean (1968/1996) The System of Objects. London: Verso. 

Baudrillard, Jean (1973/1975) The Mirror of Production. St Louis: Telos. 

Baudrillard, Jean (1976/1993) Symbolic Exchange and Death. London: Sage. 

Baudrillard, Jean (1983/1990) Simulations. New York: Semiotext(e). 

Baudrillard, Jean (1980-5/1990) Cool Memories. London: Verso. 

Baudrillard, Jean (1986/1989) America. London: Verso. 

Baudrillard, Jean (1990/1993) The Transparency of Evil: Essays on Extreme Phenomena. 
London: Verso. 

Bauman, Zygmunt (1992) Intimations of Postmodernity. London: Routledge. 

Cohen, G.A. (1978/1986) Karl Marx’s Theory of History: A Defence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Featherstone, Mike (1991) Consumer Culture and Postmodernism. London: Sage. 

Foucault, Michel (1963/1975) The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception. 
New York: Vintage. 

Foucault, Michel (1978/1980) The History of Sexuality. Vol. 1: An Introduction. New York: 
Vintage. 



24 


The consumer society 


Gabriel, Yiannis and Lang, Tim (1995) The Unmanageable Consumer: Contemporary Consump- 
tion and its Fragmentation. London: Sage. 

Galbraith, John Kenneth (1958/1984) The Affluent Society, 4th edn. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin. 

Jameson, Fredric (1991) Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press. 

Lyotard, Jean-Fran^ois (1979/1984) The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Manning, Robert and Williams, Brett (1996) Credit Card Nation: America's Dangerous Addic- 
tion to Consumer Debt. New York: Basic. 

Marx, Karl (1981) Capital, Volume II. New York: Vintage. 

Merton, Robert (1968) Social Theory and Social Structure. New York: Free Press. 

Ritzer, George (1991) Metatheorizing in Sociology. New York: Lexington. 

Ritzer, George (1995) Expressing America: A Critique of the Global Credit Card Society. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge. 

Ritzer, George (1996) The McDonaldization of Society, rev. edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine 
Forge. 

Williams, Rosalind (1982) Dream Worlds: Mass Comsumption in Late Nineteenth-Century 
France. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 



PART I 

THE FORMAL LITURGY 
OF THE OBJECT 


1 

Profusion 


There is all around us today a kind of fantastic conspicuousness of con- 
sumption and abundance, constituted by the multiplication of objects, 
services and material goods, and this represents something of a funda- 
mental mutation in the ecology of the human species. Strictly speaking, 
the humans of the age of affluence are surrounded not so much by other 
human beings, as they were in all previous ages, but by objects. Their 
daily dealings are now not so much with their fellow men, but rather - 
on a rising statistical curve - with the reception and manipulation of 
goods and messages. This runs from the very complex organization of 
the household, with its dozens of technical slaves, to street furniture and 
the whole material machinery of communication; from professional 
activities to the permanent spectacle of the celebration of the object in 
advertising and the hundreds of daily messages from the mass media; 
from the minor proliferation of vaguely obsessional gadgetry to the 
symbolic psychodramas fuelled by the nocturnal objects which come to 
haunt us even in our dreams. The two concepts 'environment' and 
'ambience' have doubtless only enjoyed such a vogue since we have 
come to live not so much alongside other human beings - in their 
physical presence and the presence of their speech - as beneath the mute 
gaze of mesmerizing, obedient objects which endlessly repeat the same 
refrain: that of our dumbfounded power, our virtual affluence, our 
absence one from another. Just as the wolf-child became a wolf by living 
among wolves, so we too are slowly becoming functional. We live by 
object time: by this I mean that we live at the pace of objects, live to the 
rhythm of their ceaseless succession. Today, it is we who watch them as 
they are born, grow to maturity and die, whereas in all previous 
civilizations it was timeless objects, instruments or monuments which 
outlived the generations of human beings. 

Objects are neither a flora nor a fauna. And yet they do indeed give the 
impression of a proliferating vegetation, a jungle in which the new wild 
man of modern times has difficulty recovering the reflexes of civilization. 




26 


The formal liturgy of the object 


We have to attempt rapidly to describe this fauna and flora, which man 
has produced and which comes back to encircle and invade him as it 
might in a bad science fiction novel. We have to describe these things as 
we see and experience them, never forgetting, in their splendour and 
profusion, that they are the product of a human activity and are dominated 
not by natural ecological laws, but by the law of exchange-value. 

The busiest streets of London are crowded with shops whose show cases 
display all the riches of the world, Indian shawls, American revolvers, Chinese 
porcelain, Parisian corsets, furs from Russia and spices from the tropics, but all 
of these worldly things bear odious, white paper labels with Arabic numerals 
and the laconic symbols £.s.d. This is how commodities are presented in 
circulation. (Marx ) 1 


Profusion and the Package 

Profusion, piling high are clearly the most striking descriptive features. 
The big department stores, with their abundance of canned foods and 
clothing, of foodstuffs and ready-made garments, are like the primal 
landscape, the geometrical locus of abundance. But every street, with its 
cluttered, glittering shop-windows (the least scarce commodity here 
being light, without which the merchandise would be merely what it is), 
their displays of cooked meats, and indeed the entire alimentary and 
vestimentary feast, all stimulate magical salivation. There is something 
more in this piling high than the quantity of products: the manifest 
presence of surplus, the magical, definitive negation of scarcity, the 
maternal, luxurious sense of being already in the Land of Cockaigne. 
Our markets, major shopping thoroughfares and superstores also mimic 
a new-found nature of prodigious fecundity. These are our Valleys of 
Canaan where, in place of milk and honey, streams of neon flow down 
over ketchup and plastic. But no matter! We find here the fervid hope 
that there should be not enough, but too much - and too much for 
everyone: by buying a piece of this land, you acquire the crumbling 
pyramid of oysters, meats, pears or tinned asparagus. You buy the part 
for the whole. And this metonymic, repetitive discourse of consumable 
matter, of the commodity, becomes once again, through a great collective 
metaphor - by virtue of its very excess - the image of the gift, and of that 
inexhaustible and spectacular prodigality which characterizes the feast. 

Beyond stacking, which is the most rudimentary yet cogent form of 
abundance, objects are organized in packages or collections. Almost all 
the shops selling clothing or household appliances offer a range of 
differentiated objects, evoking, echoing and offsetting one another. The 
antique dealer's window provides the aristocratic, luxury version of 
these sets of objects, which evoke not so much a superabundance of 
substance as a gamut of select and complementary objects presented for 
the consumer to choose among, but presented also to create in him a 
psychological chain reaction, as he peruses them, inventories them and 



Profusion 


27 


grasps them as a total category. Few objects today are offered alone, 
without a context of objects which 'speaks' them. And this changes the 
consumer's relation to the object: he no longer relates to a particular 
object in its specific utility, but to a set of objects in its total signification. 
Washing machine, refrigerator and dishwasher taken together have a 
different meaning from the one each has individually as an appliance. 
The shop-window, the advertisement, the manufacturer and the brand 
name, which here plays a crucial role, impose a coherent, collective 
vision, as though they were an almost indissociable totality, a series. This 
is, then, no longer a sequence of mere objects, but a chain of signifiers, 
in so far as all of these signify one another reciprocally as part of a 
more complex super-object, drawing the consumer into a series of more 
complex motivations. It is evident that objects are never offered for 
consumption in absolute disorder. They may, in certain cases, imitate 
disorder the better to seduce, but they are always arranged to mark out 
directive paths, to orientate the purchasing impulse towards netivorks of 
objects in order to captivate that impulse and bring it, in keeping with its 
own logic, to the highest degree of commitment, to the limits of its 
economic potential. Clothing, machines and toiletries thus constitute 
object pathzvays, which establish inertial constraints in the consumer: he 
will move logically from one object to another. He will be caught up in a 
calculus of objects, and this is something quite different from the frenzy 
of buying and acquisitiveness to which the simple profusion of commod- 
ities gives rise. 


The Drugstore 

The synthesis of profusion and calculation is the drugstore. The drug- 
store (or the new shopping centre) achieves a synthesis of consumer 
activities, not the least of which are shopping, flirting with objects, 
playful wandering and all the permutational possibilities of these. In this 
respect, the drugstore is more representative of modern consumption 
than the department stores. There, the quantitative centralization of the 
products leaves less margin for ludic exploration, the arrangement of 
departments and products imposing a more utilitarian path on the con- 
sumer. And, generally, the large stores retain something of the period in 
which they emerged, when broad classes of the population were first 
gaining access to everyday consumer goods. There is a quite different 
meaning to the drugstore: it does not juxtapose categories of mer- 
chandise, but lumps signs together indiscriminately, lumps together all 
categories of commodities, which are regarded as partial fields of a sign- 
consuming totality. In the drugstore, the cultural centre becomes part 
of the shopping centre. It would be simplistic to say that culture is 
'prostituted' there. It is culturalized. Simultaneously, commodities (cloth- 
ing, groceries, catering etc.) are also culturalized in their turn, since they 



28 


The formal liturgy of the object 


are transformed into the substance of play and distinction, into luxury 
accessories, into one element among others in the general package of 
consumables. 

A new art of living, a new way of living, say the adverts - a 'switched-on' 
daily experience. You can shop pleasantly in a single air-conditioned location, 
buy your food there, purchase things for your flat or country cottage - 
clothing, flowers, the latest novel or the latest gadget. And you can do all this 
in a single trip, while husband and children watch a film, and then all dine 
together right there. 

There's a cafe, a cinema, a bookshop, places to buy trinkets, clothing and 
lots more in the shopping centres: the drugstore takes in everything in 
kaleidoscopic mode. If the department store offers the fairground spec- 
tacle of commodities, the drugstore presents the subtle recital of con- 
sumption, the whole 'art' of which consists in playing on the ambiguity 
of the sign in objects, and sublimating their status as things of use and as 
commodities in a play upon 'ambience'. This is generalized neo-culture, 
where there is no longer any difference between a delicatessen and an art 
gallery, between Playboy and a treatise on palaeontology. And the drug- 
store is to modernize itself to the point of introducing 'grey matter': 

Just selling products doesn't interest us. We want to put a bit of grey matter in 
there too . . . Three levels. A bar, a dancefloor and sales outlets. Knick-knacks, 
records, paperback books, intellectual books, a bit of everything. But we aren't 
trying to flatter the clientele. We are really offering them 'something'. A 
language laboratory operates on the second level. Among the records and 
books, you can find the major movements which are stirring our society. 
Experimental music, tomes which explain our times. This is the 'grey matter' 
that goes with the products we sell. It's a drugstore, then, but a new-style 
drugstore with something extra - a little intelligence, perhaps, and a bit of 
human warmth. 

The drugstore can become a whole town: this is the case with Parly 2 
with its giant shopping centre in which 'art and leisure mingle with 
everyday life' and each group of residences radiates out from its 
swimming-pool, where the local clubhouse becomes its focus. A church 
built 'in the round', tennis courts ('the least we could do'), elegant 
boutiques and a library. The tiniest ski resort borrows this 'universalist' 
model of the drugstore: all activities there are encapsulated in, system- 
atically combined around and centred on the basic concept of 'ambience'. 
Thus Flaine-la-Prodigue offers you a complete, all-purpose, combinator- 
ial existence: 

Our Mont Blanc, our spruce forests; our Olympic runs, our children's 
'plateau'; our architecture carved, chiselled and polished like a work of art; the 
purity of the air we breathe; the refined ambience of our Forum (modelled on 
the forums of Mediterranean towns. A lively time is to be had there after a day 
on the slopes. Cafes, restaurants, shops, skating-rinks, a night club, a cinema 
and a cultural and amusement centre are all located in the Forum to make the 
life you live off-piste particularly rich and varied); our internal TV system; our 
world-scale future (we shall soon be listed as a cultural monument by the Arts 
Ministry). 2 



Profusion 


29 


We are at the point where consumption is laying hold of the whole of 
life, where all activities are sequenced in the same combinatorial mode, 
where the course of satisfaction is outlined in advance, hour by hour, 
where the 'environment' is total - fully air-conditioned, organized, 
culturalized. In the phenomenology of consumption, this general 
'air-conditioning' of life, goods, objects, services, behaviour and social 
relations represents the perfected, 'consummated' [consomme] stage of an 
evolution which runs from affluence pure and simple, through inter- 
connected networks of objects, to the total conditioning of action and 
time, and finally to the systematic atmospherics built into those cities of 
the future that are our drugstores. Parly 2s and modern airports. 

Parly 2 

'The biggest shopping centre in Europe.' 

'Printemps, BHV, Dior, Prisunic, Lanvin, Franck et Fils, Hediard, two 
cinemas, a drugstore, a Suma supermarket, a hundred other shops - all in a 
single location!' 

In the choice of shops, from grocery to high fashion, two imperatives: 
commercial dynamism and aesthetic sense. The famous slogan, 'Ugliness 
doesn't sell', is now passe. It might be replaced by: 'The beauty of the setting is 
the prime requirement for happy living.' 

A two-storey structure organized around a central mall, which is the split- 
level main thoroughfare - the triumphal avenue. Small- and large-scale traders 
reconciled. The modern pace of life reconciled with age-old idle wandering. 

The unprecedented comfort of strolling among shops whose tempting wares 
are openly displayed on the mall, without even a shop-window for a screen, 
the mall itself being a combination of the rue de la Paix and the Champs- 
Elysees. Adorned with fountains, artificial trees, pavilions and benches, it is 
wholly exempt from changes of season or bad weather: an exceptional system 
of climate control, requiring 13 kilometres of air-conditioning ducts, makes for 
perpetual springtime. 

Not only can you buy anything here, from shoelaces to an airline ticket; not 
only can you find insurance companies and cinemas, banks or medical 
services, bridge clubs and art exhibitions, but you are not a slave to the clock. 
The mall, like any street, is accessible night and day, seven days a week. 

Naturally, for those who want it, the centre has introduced the most modern 
style of payment: the 'credit card'. This frees shoppers from cheques or cash - 
and even from financial difficulties. To pay, you just show your card and sign 
the bill. There's nothing more to it. And every month you get a statement 
which you can pay off in full or in monthly instalments. 

In this marriage of comfort, beauty and efficiency, the Parlysians are 
discovering the material conditions of happiness which our anarchic cities 
denied them. 

We are here at the heart of consumption as total organization of everyday 
life, total homogenization, where everything is taken over and super- 
seded in the ease and translucidity of an abstract 'happiness', defined 
solely by the resolution of tensions. The drugstore writ large in the form 
of the shopping centre, the city of the future, is the sublimate of all real 
life, of all objective social life, in which not only work and money 
disappear, but also the seasons, those distant vestiges of a cycle which 
has at last also been homogenized! Work, leisure, nature and culture: all 



30 


The formal liturgy of the object 


these things which were once dispersed, which once generated anxiety 
and complexity in real life, in our 'anarchic and archaic towns and cities', 
all these sundered activities, these activities which were more or less 
irreducible one to another, are now at last mixed and blended, climatized 
and homogenized in the same sweeping vista of perpetual shopping. All 
are now rendered sexless in the same hermaphroditic ambience of 
fashion! All at last digested and turned into the same homogeneous faecal 
matter (naturally enough, this occurs precisely under the sign of the 
disappearance of liquid cash - too visible a symbol still of the real faecality 
of real life, and of the economic and social contradictions which once 
inhabited it). That is all over now. Controlled, lubricated, consumed 
faecality has passed into things; it seeps everywhere into the indistinct- 
ness of things and social relations. Just as the gods of all countries 
coexisted syncretically in the Roman Pantheon in an immense 'digest', so 
all the gods - or demons - of consumption have come together in our 
Super Shopping Centre, which is our Pantheon - or Pandaemonium. In 
other words, all activities, labour, conflicts and seasons have been united 
and abolished in the same abstraction. The substance of life unified in 
this way, in this universal digest, can no longer have in it any meaning : 
what constituted the dreamwork, the labour of poetry and of meaning - 
in other words, the grand schemata of displacement and condensation, 
the great figures of metaphor and contradiction, which are based on 
the living interconnection of distinct elements - is no longer possible. 
The eternal substitution of homogeneous elements now reigns unchal- 
lenged. There is no longer any symbolic function, but merely an eternal 
combinatory of 'ambience' in a perpetual springtime. 



2 


The Miraculous Status 
of Consumption 


The Melanesian natives were thrilled by the planes which passed over- 
head. But those objects never came down from the skies to them, 
whereas they did descend for the whites, doing so because there were, 
in certain places, similar objects on the ground to attract the flying air- 
craft. So, the natives themselves set about building a simulacrum of 
an aeroplane from branches and creepers. They marked out a landing- 
ground, which they painstakingly illuminated by night, and patiently 
waited for the real aircraft to alight on it. 

Without calling the anthropoid hunter-gatherers who today wander 
through our urban jungles primitives (though why not?), we might see 
this as a fable of the consumer society. The beneficiary of the consumer 
miracle also sets in place a whole array of sham objects, of characteristic 
signs of happiness, and then waits (waits desperately, a moralist would 
say) for happiness to alight. 

I do not mean to present this as a principle of analysis. What we have 
here is simply the private and collective consumer mentality. But at this 
rather superficial level, we may venture this comparison: consumption is 
governed by a form of magical thinking ; daily life is governed by a 
mentality based on miraculous thinking, a primitive mentality, in so far 
as that has been defined as being based on a belief in the omnipotence of 
thoughts (though what we have in this case is a belief in the omni- 
potence of signs). 'Affluence' is, in effect, merely the accumulation of the 
signs of happiness. The satisfactions which the objects themselves confer 
are the equivalent of the fake aircraft, the Melanesians' models, i.e. the 
anticipated reflection of the potential Great Satisfaction, of the Total 
Affluence, the last Jubilation of the definitive beneficiaries of the miracle, 
from whose insane hope daily banality draws its sustenance. These lesser 
satisfactions are as yet only exorcistic practices, means of calling down or 
summoning up total Well-being or Bliss. 

In everyday practice, the blessings of consumption are not experienced 
as resulting from work or from a production process; they are experi- 
enced as a miracle. There is, admittedly, a difference between the 
Melanesian native and the viewer settling down in front of his TV set, 
turning the switch and waiting for images from the whole world to come 
down to him: the fact is that the images generally obey, whereas planes 
never condescend to land by magical command. But this technical 



32 


The formal liturgy of the object 


success is not sufficient to show that our conduct is realistic and the 
natives' behaviour imaginary. For the same psychical economy ensures 
on the one hand that the natives' confidence in magic is never destroyed 
(if the process fails to work, it is because they have not performed the 
necessary acts) and on the other that the miracle of TV is perpetually 
brought off, without ceasing to be a miracle - this latter by the grace of 
technology, which wipes out, so far as the consumer's consciousness is 
concerned, the very principle of social reality, the long social process of 
production which leads to the consumption of images. And does this so 
well that the TV viewer, like the native, experiences the appropriation as 
a capturing in a mode of miraculous efficacy. 


The Cargo Myth 

Consumer goods thus present themselves as a harnessing of power, not as 
products embodying work. And, more generally, once severed from its 
objective determinations, the profusion of goods is felt as a blessing of 
nature, as a manna, a gift from heaven. On contact with the whites, the 
Melanesians (to turn again to them) developed a Messianic form of 
worship: the cargo cult. The whites, they reasoned, lived lives of plenty, 
whereas they had nothing. This was because the whites knew how to 
capture or divert the goods that were destined for them, the blacks, by 
their ancestors who had withdrawn to the ends of the earth. One day, 
when the white men's magic had been foiled, their ancestors would 
return with the miraculous cargo, and they would never again know 
want. 

Thus 'underdeveloped' peoples experience Western 'aid' as something 
natural and expected, something long due to them. As a magical remedy 
- having no relation to history, technology, continued progress and the 
world market. But if we look at all closely at them, do not the Western 
beneficiaries of the economic miracle behave collectively in the same 
way? Does not the mass of consumers experience plenty as an effect of 
nature, surrounded as they are by the fantasies of the Land of Cockaigne 
and persuaded by the advertisers' litany that all will be given to them 
and that they have a legitimate, inalienable right to plenty? Faith in 
consumption is a new element; the rising generations are now inheritors: 
they no longer merely inherit goods, but the natural right to abundance. 
And so the cargo myth lives again in the West whereas it is declining in 
Melanesia. For even if abundance is becoming a banal, daily fact, it 
continues to be experienced as a daily miracle, in so far as it does not 
appear to be something produced and extracted, something won after a 
historical and social effort, but something dispensed by a beneficent 
mythological agency to which we are the legitimate heirs: Technology, 
Progress, Growth, etc. 

This does not mean that our society is not firstly, objectively and 



The miraculous status of consumption 


33 


decisively a society of production, an order of production, and therefore the 
site of an economic and political strategy. But it means that there is 
entangled with that order an order of consumption, which is an order of 
the manipulation of signs. To that extent, we may draw a (no doubt 
venturesome) parallel with magical thought, for both of these live off 
signs and under the protection of signs. More and more basic aspects of our 
contemporary societies fall under a logic of significations, an analysis of 
codes and symbolic systems - though this does not make these societies 
primitive ones, and the problem of the historical production of these 
significations and codes remains fully intact - that analysis having to 
articulate itself to the analysis of the process of material and technical 
production as its theoretical continuation. 


The Consumed Vertigo of Catastrophe 

The usage of signs is always ambivalent. Its function is always a 
conjuring - both a conjuring up and a conjuring away: causing some- 
thing to emerge in order to capture it in signs (forces, reality, happiness, 
etc.) and evoking something in order to deny and repress it. We know 
that, in its myths, magical thought seeks to conjure away change and 
history. In a way, the generalized consumption of images, of facts, of 
information aims also to conjure away the real ivith the signs of the real, to 
conjure away history with the signs of change, etc. 

Reality we consume in either anticipatory or retrospective mode. At 
any rate we do so at a distance, a distance which is that of the sign. For 
example, when Paris-Match showed us the secret forces assigned to 
protect the General [de Gaulle] training with machine-guns in the 
basement of the Prefecture, that image was not read as 'information', i.e. 
as referring to the political context and its elucidation. For every one of 
us, it bore within it the temptation of a superb assassination attempt, a 
prodigious violent event: the attempt will take place, it is going to take 
place; the image is the forerunner to it, and embodies the anticipated 
pleasure; all perversions have their acting-out. What we see here is the 
same inverse effect as in the expectation of miraculous abundance within 
the cargo cult. Cargo or catastrophe - in both cases, we have an effect of 
consumed vertigo. 

We may, admittedly, say that it is, then, our fantasies which come to be 
signified in the image and consumed in it. But this psychological aspect 
interests us less than what comes into the image to be both consumed in 
it and repressed: the real world, the event, history. 

What characterizes consumer society is the universality of the news item 
[le fait divers] in mass communication. All political, historical and cultural 
information is received in the same - at once anodyne and miraculous - 
form of the news item. It is entirely actualized - i.e. dramatized in the 
spectacular mode - and entirely deactualized - i.e. distanced by the 



34 


The formal liturgy of the object 


communication medium and reduced to signs. The news item is thus not 
one category among others, but the cardinal category of our magical 
thinking, of our mythology. 

That mythology is buttressed by the all the more voracious demand 
for reality, for 'truth', for 'objectivity'. Everywhere we find 'cinema-verite', 
live reporting, the newsflash, the high-impact photo, the eye-witness 
report, etc. Everywhere what is sought is the 'heart of the event', the 
'heart of the battle', the 'live', the 'face to face' - the dizzy sense of a total 
presence at the event, the Great Thrill of Lived Reality - i.e. the miracle 
once again, since the truth of the media report, televised and taped, is 
precisely that I was not there. But it is the truer than true which counts or, 
in other words, the fact of being there without being there. Or, to put it 
yet another way, the fantasy. 

What mass communications give us is not reality, but the dizzying ivhirl 
of reality [le vertige de la realite]. Or again, without playing on words, a 
reality without the dizzying whirl, for the heart of Amazonia, the heart 
of reality, the heart of passion, the heart of war, this 'Heart' which is the 
locus of mass communications and which gives them their vertiginous 
sentimentality, is precisely the place where nothing happens. It is the 
allegorical sign of passion and of the event. And signs are sources of 
security. 

So we live, sheltered by signs, in the denial of the real. A miraculous 
security: when we look at the images of the world, who can distinguish 
this brief irruption of reality from the profound pleasure of not being 
there? The image, the sign, the message - all these things we 'consume' - 
represent our tranquillity consecrated by distance from the world, a 
distance more comforted by the allusion to the real (even where the 
allusion is violent) than compromised by it. 

The content of the messages, the signifieds of the signs are largely 
immaterial. We are not engaged in them, and the media do not involve 
us in the world, but offer for our consumption signs as signs, albeit signs 
accredited with the guarantee of the real. It is here that we can define 
the praxis of consumption. The consumer's relation to the real world, to 
politics, to history, to culture is not a relation of interest, investment or 
committed responsibility - nor is it one of total indifference: it is a 
relation of curiosity. On the same pattern, we can say that the dimension 
of consumption as we have defined it here is not one of knowledge of 
the world, nor is it one of total ignorance: it is the dimension of 
misrecognition. 

Curiosity and misrecognition denote one and the same form of overall 
behaviour towards the real, a form of behaviour generalized and sys- 
tematized by the practice of mass communications and characteristic, 
therefore, of our 'consumer society'. This is the denial of the real on the 
basis of an avid and repeated apprehending of its signs. 

We can at the same time define the locus of consumption: daily life. This 
latter is not merely the sum of daily doings, the dimension of banality 



The miraculous status of consumption 


35 


and repetition: it is a system of interpretation. Everydayness is the separa- 
tion of a total praxis into a transcendent, autonomous and abstract 
sphere (of the political, the social, the cultural) and the immanent, closed, 
abstract sphere of the 'private'. Work, leisure, family, acquaintances: the 
individual reorganizes all these things in an involutive mode, this side of 
the world and of history, in a coherent system based on the closure of 
the private, the formal freedom of the individual, the securitizing 
appropriation of the environment, and misrecognition. Everydayness is, 
from the objective point of view of the totality, impoverished and 
residual, but it is, by contrast, triumphant and euphoric in its effort 
totally to autonomize and reinterpret the world 'for internal consump- 
tion'. It is here that there is profound, organic collusion between the 
sphere of private everydayness and mass communications. 

Everydayness as closure, as Verborgenheit, would be unbearable with- 
out the simulacrum of the world, without the alibi of participation in the 
world. It has to be fuelled by the images, the repeated signs of that 
transcendence. As we have seen, its tranquillity needs the vertiginous 
spin of reality and history. Its tranquillity requires perpetual consumed 
violence for its own exaltation. That is its particular obscenity. It is partial 
to events and violence, provided the violence is served up at room 
temperature. The caricature image of this has the TV viewer lounging in 
front of images of the Vietnam War. The TV image, like a window turned 
outside-in, opens initially on to a room and, in that room, the cruel 
exteriority of the world becomes something intimate and warm - warm 
with a perverse warmth. 

At this 'lived' level, consumption makes maximum exclusion from the 
(real, social, historical) world the maximum index of security. It seeks the 
resolution of tensions - that happiness by default. But it runs up against 
a contradiction: the contradiction between the passivity implied by this 
new value system and the norms of a social morality which, in essentials, 
remains one of voluntarism, action, efficacy and sacrifice. Hence, the 
intense sense of guilt which attaches to this new style of hedonistic 
behaviour and the urgent need, clearly outlined by the 'strategists of 
desire', to take the guilt out of passivity. For millions of people without 
histories, and happy to be so, passivity has to be rendered guiltless. And 
this is where spectacular dramatization by the mass media comes in (the 
accident/ catastrophe report as a generalized category of all messages): in 
order for this contradiction between puritanical and hedonistic morality 
to be resolved, this tranquillity of the private sphere has to appear as a 
value preserved only with great difficulty, constantly under threat and beset 
by the dangers of a catastrophic destiny. The violence and inhumanity of 
the outside world are needed not just so that security may be experi- 
enced more deeply as security (in the economy of enjoyment [ jouissance ]), 
but also so that it should be felt justifiable at every moment as an option 
(in the economy of the morality of salvation). The signs of destiny, 
passion and fatality must flourish around the preserved zone in order 



36 


The formal liturgy of the object 


that everydayness may seize back the grandeur and sublimity of which it 
is, precisely, the reverse side. Fatality is thus evoked and signified on all 
sides, so that banality may revel in it and find favour. The fact that road 
accidents play so extraordinarily well on radio and TV, in the press, in 
individual conversation and in the talk of the nation proves this: the 
crash is the finest exemplar of 'daily fatality'. If it is exploited with such 
passion, this is because it performs an essential collective function. The 
litany of road deaths is rivalled only by the litany of weather forecasts. In 
fact the two form a mythic couple - the obsession with the sun and the 
litany of death are inseparable. 

Everydayness thus offers this curious mix of euphoric justification by 
'social standing' and passivity, on the one hand, and the delectatio tnorosa 
of potential victims of destiny on the other. The whole forms a specific 
mentality or, rather, 'sentimentality'. The consumer society sees itself as 
an encircled Jerusalem, rich and threatened. That is its ideology . 1 



3 

The Vicious Circle of Growth 


Collective Expenditure and Redistribution 

Consumer society is not characterized merely by the rapid growth of 
individual expenditure. It is also accompanied by the growth of expend- 
iture met by third parties (by the government in particular) for the 
benefit of private individuals, the purpose of some of this being to 
reduce the inequality of the distribution of resources. 

This proportion of collective expenditure meeting individual needs 
has risen from 13 per cent of total consumption in 1959 to 17 per cent in 
1965. In 1965, the percentage of needs met by third parties was: 

• 1 per cent for food and clothing ('subsistence'); 

• 13 per cent for housing expenses, transport and communication 
networks ('the environment'); 

• 67 per cent in the fields of education, culture, sport and health 
('protection and development of the person'). 

Collective expenditure is clearly channelled more towards human 
beings, then, than into the goods and material equipment made available 
for their use. Similarly, public expenditure is at its highest under the 
budget heads which look set to grow fastest. But it is interesting to note, 
with E. Lisle, that it was precisely in this sector where the community 
assumes the greater part of expenditure, in the sector which it has 
developed most intensively, that the crisis of May 1968 broke out. 

In France, the 'social budget of the nation' redistributes more than 20 
per cent of gross internal production (the national education system 
alone absorbs the total of taxes on personal incomes). The heavy dis- 
parity between private consumption and collective expenditure which 
Galbraith attacks seems much more characteristic of the United States 
than of the European nations. But this is not the issue. The real problem 
is whether this state expenditure makes for an objective equalization of social 
chances. Now, it seems clear that this 'redistribution' has little effect on 
social discrimination at all levels. As for inequality of standards of living, 
comparison of the two studies on family budgets made in 1956 and 
1965 shows no reduction in the discrepancies. We know the incurable, 
hereditary disparities which apply in the field of education: where other 
mechanisms more subtle than the economic are in play, the use of 
economic redistribution alone very largely amounts to reinforcing the 
mechanisms of cultural inertia. The proportion of 17-year-olds in full- 



38 


The formal liturgy of the object 


time education is 52 per cent: 90 per cent for the children of senior 
managers, professionals and teachers, less than 40 per cent for farmers 
and workers. In higher education, the chances of access for boys in the 
former category are more than 33 per cent, but only 1 or 2 per cent for 
the latter. 

In the health field, the redistributive effects are not clear: among the 
active population, there would seem to be an absence of redistribution, 
as though each social category were at least intent on getting back what 
it paid in contributions. 

As regards taxation and social security, let us examine what E. Lisle 
has to say on the topic. 

Growing public consumption is financed by the development of taxes and 
other contributions: where social security alone is concerned, the ratio of 
contributions to total wage costs has risen from 23.9 per cent in 1959 to 25.9 
per cent in 1967. Social security thus costs employed workers a quarter of their 
resources, it being fair to regard the so-called 'employers' contributions' as a 
deduction at source from workers' incomes, as is also the 5 per cent fixed-rate 
contribution. The total of these deductions is much higher than the sum 
deducted in income tax. Since the latter is progressive, but social security 
contributions and the fixed-rate contribution are regressive, the net effect of tax 
and other deductions is regressive. If we accept that indirect taxation, which 
mainly takes the form of VAT, is proportional to consumption, we may 
conclude that direct and indirect taxation and the social contributions paid 
by households and very largely earmarked for the financing of collective 
consumption would not, overall, have any effect of reducing inequality or any 
redistributive impact. 

So far as the effectiveness of public amenities is concerned, the available 
studies show frequent 'deflections' from the intentions of the authorities. 
When these amenities are designed for the most deprived, we gradually see 
their 'clientele' becoming more varied, with this diversification leading to an 
affective rejection, more for psychological than financial reasons, of the poor. 
When the amenities are intended to be open to all, the elimination of the 
weakest members of the community occurs from the outset. The effort to 
achieve open access usually ends in a segregation reflecting the social hier- 
archy. This would seem to indicate that in a highly inegalitarian society, 
political actions aimed at ensuring formal equality of access more often than 
not have increased the degree of inequality. (Commission du Plan, Consomma- 
tion et Mode de Vie) 

Inequality with regard to death rates remains very great. 

Once again, then, the unadorned figures have no meaning and the 
increase in available resources - a green light to affluence - has to be 
interpreted in its real social logic. Social redistribution and, in particular, 
the effectiveness of public action has to be questioned. Should we regard 
this 'deviant' performance on the part of 'social' redistribution, this 
restoration of social inequalities by the very mechanisms which are 
supposed to eliminate them, as a temporary anomaly due to the inertia 
of the social structure? Or should we, rather, formulate the radical 
hypothesis that the mechanisms of redistribution, which are so success- 
ful in preserving privilege, are in fact an integral part, a tactical element, 
of the power system - and hand in glove in that regard with the 



The vicious circle of growth 


39 


educational and electoral systems? There would then be no point deplor- 
ing the repeated failure of a social policy: we should, rather, have to 
conclude that it was performing its real function to perfection . 1 

In spite of certain findings, the evaluation of the effect of transfers, as 
regards both redistribution and the orientation of consumption, must be 
delicately handled. If the overall effect of transfers has, in the long run, 
made it possible to reduce the range of net incomes by half, the relative 
stability of this distribution of net incomes has only been achieved at the 
cost of a very great increase in the sums redistributed. 


Environmental Nuisance 

The advances of affluence - that is to say, of the possession of ever more 
goods and individual and collective amenities - have been accompanied 
by increasingly serious 'environmental nuisances' which are a con- 
sequence, on the one hand, of industrial development and technical 
progress, and, on the other, of the very structures of consumption. 

First, we have seen the degradation of our shared living space by 
economic activities: noise, air and water pollution, environmental 
destruction, the disruption of residential zones by the development of 
new amenities (airports, motorways, etc.). Traffic congestion produces a 
colossal deficit in technical, psychological and human terms. Yet what 
does this matter, since the necessary excess of infrastructural building, 
the extra expenditure on petrol, the costs of treatment for accident 
victims, etc. will all be totted up as consumption, i.e. will become, under 
cover of the gross national product and statistics, an indication of growth 
and wealth! Does the flourishing mineral water industry permit us to 
speak of a real increase in 'affluence' since, to a large extent, it is merely 
a response to the deficient quality of urban water? And so on. We should 
never be done with listing all the productive and consumer activities 
which merely counteract internal nuisances generated by the system of 
growth. Once it has passed a certain threshold, extra productivity is 
almost entirely wiped out, swallowed up, by this homoeopathic treatment 
of growth by growth. 

The 'cultural nuisance effects' caused by the technical and cultural 
effects of rationalization and mass production are, of course, strictly 
incalculable. Moreover, value judgements prevent us from defining 
common criteria. It would not be possible objectively to characterize the 
'nuisance effect' of a grim housing estate or a 'Z feature' movie, as we 
might do with water pollution. Only a civil service inspector could 
propose, as happened at a recent congress, the creation, alongside a 
'clean air ministry', of a 'crime of offending the intelligence' to protect 
the populace against the effects of the sensationalist press! But we may 
admit that nuisance effects of this kind are growing at the same pace as 
affluence. 



40 


The formal liturgy of the object 


The built-in obsolescence of products and machines, the destruction of 
old structures by which certain needs were met, and the increasing 
number of bogus innovations that are of no appreciable benefit to our 
lives may all be added to the balance sheet here. 

Perhaps even more serious than the downgrading of products and 
machinery is the fact, pointed out by E. Lisle, that 

the cost of rapid progress in the production of wealth is the mobility of labour, 
and therefore the instability of employment. A turnover and retraining of 
human beings which has very serious social costs and, most importantly, 
produces a general sense of insecurity. The psychological and social pressures 
of mobility, of status and competition at all levels (income, prestige, culture, 
etc.) are becoming more burdensome for everyone. It takes longer to recover, 
to get back to one's best, and offset the psychological and nervous wear- 
and-tear produced by the wide range of nuisances: the journey to work, 
overpopulation, continual stress and aggression ... In short, the major cost of 
the consumer society is the sense of generalized insecurity it engenders. 

Which leads to the system, as it were, devouring itself: 

In this rapid growth . . . which inevitably engenders inflationist tensions ... a 
non-negligible fraction of the population is not able to keep up with the pace. 
These people are 'left on the scrapheap'. And those who stay the course and 
achieve the mode of life which is proposed as the model do so only at the cost 
of an effort which leaves them diminished. With the result that society finds 
itself compelled to cushion the social costs of growth by redistributing a 
growing proportion of the gross internal product into social investments 
(education, research, health) which are designed, above all, to serve growth. 
(E. Lisle) 

Now, these compensatory expenditures, whether private or collective, 
which are intended to cope with dysfunctions rather than increase 
positive satisfaction, are added in, in all the accounts, as part of the rise in 
the standard of living. Not to mention the consumption of drugs, alcohol 
and all the other conspicuous or compensatory expenditures, or the 
military budgets, etc. All of this is growth and, hence, affluence. 

The growing number of categories of people 'dependent on society', 
though not actually a nuisance as such (the battle against illness and the 
decline in mortality being one of the aspects of 'affluence' - a consumer 
demand), nonetheless puts a heavy financial burden on the process itself. 
Ultimately, writes J. Bourgeois-Pichat, 'one might imagine the part of the 
population whose activity is devoted to maintaining the good health of 
the country's inhabitants growing larger than the part that is actually 
involved in production.' 

In short, we are everywhere reaching a point where the dynamic of 
growth and affluence is becoming circular and generating only wheel- 
spin and where, increasingly, the system is exhausting itself in its own 
reproduction. A threshold where the wheels turn, but do not advance, 
where the entire increase in productivity goes into maintaining the 
system's conditions of survival. The only objective result, then, is the 
cancerous growth of figures and balance sheets. In all essentials, how- 
ever, we are returning, in strict terms, to the primitive state, which is that 



The vicious circle of growth 


41 


of absolute penury, the state of the animal or the native, all of whose 
energies are devoted to survival. Or the state of those who, as Daumal 
has it, 'plant potatoes so as to be able to eat potatoes, so as to be able to 
plant potatoes again, etc.' Now, a system is inefficient when its cost is 
equal to, or higher than, its output. We are not at that point. But, through 
nuisances and the social and technical correctives to those nuisances, we 
can see on the horizon a general tendency towards a tentacular internal 
functioning of the system. With 'dysfunctional' consumption, both individ- 
ual and collective, rising more quickly than the 'functional', the system is 
basically becoming parasitic upon itself. 


The Accounting of Growth or the Mystique of GNP 

In this reference to mystique, we are speaking of the most extraordinary 
collective bluff on the part of modern societies - of an operation of 'white 
magic' on the figures which in reality conceals a black magic of collective 
bewitchment. We are speaking of the absurd gymnastics of accounting 
illusions, of national accounts. Nothing enters into these except factors 
which are visible and measurable by the criteria of economic rationality, 
and that indeed is the central principle of the magic. Research, culture 
and women's domestic labour are all excluded from these accounts on 
this basis, though certain things which have no business there do figure 
in them, merely because they are measurable. Moreover, like dreams, they 
have no conception of the negative and lump together everything - 
nuisances and positive elements - in the most total (though by no means 
innocent) illogicality. 

Economists lump together the value of all products and services of 
all kinds, making no distinction between public and private services. 
Nuisances and palliatives to them figure in the accounts on the same 
basis as the production of objectively useful goods. 'Motion pictures, 
television, cars, and the vast opportunities which go with mobility, 
together with such less enchanting merchandise as narcotics, comic 
books, and pornographia, are all included in an advancing gross national 
product.' 2 

The deficit side - damage and obsolescence - does not figure in the 
accounts or, if it does, it figures positively ! The costs of travel to work, for 
example, are accounted as consumer expenditure! This is the logical 
result, expressed in figures, of the magical goal of production for its own 
sake: every article produced is sacralized by the very fact of its being produced. 
Every article produced is positive, every measurable thing is positive. The 
30 per cent reduction in the luminosity of air in Paris over the past 50 
years is regarded as external and non-existent by the accountants. But if 
it results in a greater expenditure of electrical energy, of light bulbs and 
spectacles, etc., then it exists - and exists, moreover, as an increase in 
production and social wealth! Any restrictive or selective infringement of 



42 


The formal liturgy of the object 


the sacred principle of production and growth is met with cries of 
sacrilege ('We shall not touch one screw of Concorde!'). As a collective 
obsession consigned to the accounting ledgers, productivity primarily 
has the social function of a myth. And anything can be used to fuel that 
myth - even the conversion of objective realities which refute it into 
figures which confirm it. 

But there is perhaps in this mythic algebra of financial accounts a 
profound truth, the truth of the economico-political system of growth 
societies. It seems paradoxical to us that the positive and the negative 
should be added together indiscriminately. But it is perhaps quite simply 
logical. For the truth is perhaps that it is the 'negative' goods, the 
nuisances compensated, the internal operating costs, the social costs 
of 'dysfunctional' endoregulation, the subsidiary sectors of useless 
prodigality which play the dynamic role of economic engine in that set-up. 
This latent truth of the system is, of course, hidden by the figures, the 
magical addition of which conceals this admirable circularity of the 
positive and the negative (alcohol sales and hospital building, etc.). And 
this would explain the impossibility, despite all efforts and at all levels, 
of rooting out these negative aspects: the system lives by them and 
cannot rid itself of them. We shall meet this problem again in connection 
with poverty, that 'balancing counterforce' of poverty which growth 
societies 'drag along behind them' as a defect and which is in fact one of 
their most serious 'nuisances'. We have to accept the hypothesis that all 
these nuisances somewhere enter into the equation as positive factors, as 
continual factors of growth, as boosters of production and consumption. 
In the eighteenth century, in The Fable of the Bees, Mandeville proposed 
the theory (already regarded as sacrilegious and libertine in his day) that 
a society achieves equilibrium not through its virtues but through its 
vices, and that social peace, progress and human happiness are obtained 
by the instinctive immorality which leads them continually to break the 
rules. He was, of course, speaking of morality, but we may construe his 
words in a social and economic sense. It is, precisely, by its hidden 
defects, its balancing forces, its nuisances, and what seem like vices 
when compared with a rational system, that the real system prospers. 
Mandeville was accused of cynicism: it is the social order, the order of 
production, which is objectively cynical . 3 


Waste 

We know how much the affluence of rich societies is linked to waste, 
given all the talk of a 'throwaway society' and the fact that some have 
even envisaged a 'garbage-can sociology': 'Tell me what you throw away 
and I'll tell you who you are!' But the statistics of waste and rubbish are 
not interesting in themselves: they are merely a redundant marker of the 
volume of goods on offer, and their profusion. We can understand 



The vicious circle of growth 


43 


neither waste nor its functions if we see in it only the residual scraps of 
what is made to be consumed but is not. Once again, we have here a 
simplistic definition of consumption - a moral definition based on the 
imperative utility of goods. So, all our moralists rail against the squan- 
dering of wealth - from the actions of the private individual who no 
longer respects that kind of moral lazv internal to the object zvhich its use- 
value is taken to be and the object's time-span (the individual who throws 
his goods away or changes them to comply with the whims of prestige or 
fashion, etc.) to waste on the national and international scale - and even 
on a kind of global scale, where the human race is seen as squandering 
wealth in its general economy and its exploitation of natural resources. 
In short, waste is always considered a kind of madness, of insanity, of 
instinctual dysfunction, which causes man to burn his reserves and 
compromise his survival conditions by irrational practice. 

This vision at least betrays the fact that we are not in an era of real 
affluence, that every present-day individual, group or society, and even 
the species as such, stands under the sign of scarcity. Now, it is generally 
the same people who maintain the myth of the inevitable coming of 
affluence who deplore waste, linked to the menacing spectre of scarcity. 
At any event, this whole moral vision of waste as dysfunction needs to be 
reviewed from the perspective of a sociological analysis which would 
bring out its true functions. 

All societies have always wasted, squandered, expended and con- 
sumed beyond what is strictly necessary for the simple reason that it is in 
the consumption of a surplus, of a superfluity that the individual - and 
society - feel not merely that they exist, but that they are alive. That 
consumption may go so far as consumation, pure and simple destruction, 
which then takes on a specific social function. In potlatch, for example, it 
is the competitive destruction of precious goods which sets the seal on 
social organization. The Kwakiutl sacrifice blankets, canoes, etched 
'coppers', which they burn or throw into the sea to 'maintain their rank,' 
to assert their value. And, again, it is by 'wasteful expenditure' that the 
aristocratic classes have asserted their pre-eminence down the ages. The 
notion of utility, which has rationalistic, economistic origins, thus needs 
to be revised in light of a much more general social logic in which waste, 
far from being an irrational residue, takes on a positive function, taking 
over where rational utility leaves off to play its part in a higher social 
functionality - a social logic in which waste even appears ultimately as 
the essential function, the extra degree of expenditure, superfluity, the 
ritual uselessness of 'expenditure for nothing' becoming the site of 
production of values, differences and meanings on both the individual 
and the social level. Within this perspective, a definition of consumption 
as consumation - i.e. as productive waste - begins to emerge, a per- 
spective contrary to that of the 'economic' (based on necessity, accumula- 
tion and calculation) and one in which, by contrast, the superfluous 
precedes the necessary, and expenditure takes precedence in terms of 



44 The formal liturgy of the object 

value over accumulation and appropriation (even if it does not precede 
them in time). 

'O reason not the need! Our basest beggars/ Are in the poorest thing 
superfluous./ Allow not nature more than nature needs,/ Man's life is 
cheap as beast's/ writes Shakespeare in King Lear [Act II, Scene iv]. In 
other words, one of the fundamental problems posed by consumption is 
the following: do human beings organize themselves for purposes of 
survival, or in terms of the individual or collective meaning they give to 
their lives? Now, this value of 'being', this structural value may involve 
the sacrifice of economic values. And this problem is not metaphysical. It 
is at the centre of consumption and may be expressed as follows: does not 
affluence ultimately only have meaning in wastage ? 

Should we define affluence in terms of foresight and the laying in of 
provisions, as Valery does? 

When one contemplates piles of imperishable foodstuffs, is one not looking at 
time in hand and activity spared? A box of biscuits is a whole month of 
idleness and life. Pots of conserves and fibre baskets stuffed with seeds and 
nuts are a storehouse of quietude; a whole winter of tranquillity lies hoarded 
up in their aroma . . . Robinson Crusoe could smell the presence of the future 
in the coffers and chests in his store-room. His hoard radiated idleness. A 
sense of time emanated from it, in the way an absolute heat emanates from 
certain metals . . . Humanity only raised itself up slowly by finding a footing 
on that which endures. Foresight and the laying in of provisions gradually 
freed us from the rigours of our animal necessities and the 'word-for-word' 
character of our wants . . . Nature suggested this: it so arranged matters that 
we carried with us the means of resisting somewhat the inconstancy of events; 
the fat which is on our limbs, the memory which stands ready in the depth of 
our souls are models of stores laid up which our industry has imitated. 

This is the economic principle to which Nietzsche's (and also Bataille's) 
vision of the living being, who wants above all to 'expend his strength', 
stands opposed: 

Physiologists should think again before positing the 'instinct of preservation' 
as the cardinal drive in an organic creature. A living thing wants above all to 
discharge its force: 'preservation' is only a consequence of this. Beware of 
superfluous teleological principles! The entire concept 'instinct of preservation' 
is one of them . . . The 'struggle for existence' - this formula refers to an 
exceptional situation; the rule is much rather the struggle for power, the 
ambition to have 'more' and 'better' and 'quicker' and 'more often'. 
(Nietzsche, The Will to Power [Fragment 650]) 

This 'something more' by which value asserts itself may become the 
'something of one's own'. This law of symbolic value, which states that 
the essential element always lies beyond what is indispensable, is best 
illustrated in expenditure, in loss, but it may also be verified in appro- 
priation, provided that the latter has the differential function of being 
extra, of being 'something more'. As witness the Soviet example: the 
worker, the cadre, the engineer and the party member have a flat which 
does not belong to them: whether rented or granted for life, it is 
accommodation which goes with the job, tied to the social status of 



The vicious circle of growth 


45 


worker and active citizen, not to the private person. This good is a social 
service, not a piece of property, nor even less a 'consumable'. On the 
other hand, the secondary residence, the dacha in the country with its 
garden, is something which belongs to them. Neither is this a lifetime 
possession, nor is it revocable, and it can survive them and become 
hereditary. Hence the 'individualistic' infatuation attaching to it: all 
efforts are directed towards the acquisition of that dacha (for want of 
automobiles, which to some extent play this same 'second home' role in 
the West). The dacha has a prestige value and a symbolic value: it is the 
'something more'. 

In a way, it is the same with affluence: for this to become a value, there 
has to be not simply enough, but too much. A significant difference has to 
be maintained and manifested between the necessary and the super- 
fluous. This is the function of waste at all levels. By this, I mean that it is 
illusory to wish to reduce it, to aspire to eliminating it, for it is waste, in 
some way, which orientates the whole system. Indeed, just like the 
gadget (where does usefulness end, uselessness begin?), it can be neither 
defined nor delimited. All production and expenditure beyond the needs 
of strict survival can be termed waste (not just fashion in clothing and 
the food 'dustbin', but military super-gadgets, the 'Bomb', the super- 
fluous agricultural equipment of certain American farmers, and the 
industrialists who renew their machinery every two years rather than 
getting the full value out of it: not only consumption, but production too 
- not to mention politics - largely obeys the laws of ostentatious 
processes). Profitable and sumptuary investments are everywhere in- 
extricably interlinked. An industrialist who had invested 1,000 dollars in 
advertising declared: 'I know half of it is wasted, but I don't know which 
half.' This is always how it is in a complex economy: you cannot isolate 
what is useful or try to remove what is superfluous. Moreover, the 
(economically) 'wasted' half is not perhaps the half which takes on the 
least value, in the long term or, viewed more subtly, even in the very act 
of being 'lost'. 

We have to interpret the immense wastage of our affluent societies this 
way. It is that wastage which defies scarcity and, contradictorily, signifies 
abundance. It is not utility, but that wastage which, in its essence, lays 
down the psychological, sociological and economic guidelines for 
affluence. 

Is not the fact that the glass packaging can be thrown away the mark of the 

golden age? 

One of the great themes of mass culture, as analysed by Riesman and 
Morin, illustrates this in an epic register: this is the theme of the hero 
of consumption. In the West, at least, the impassioned biographies of 
heroes of production are everywhere giving way today to biographies of 
heroes of consumption. The great exemplary lives of self-made men and 
founders, pioneers, explorers and colonizers, which succeeded those of 
saints and historical figures, have today given way to the lives of movie 



46 


The formal liturgy of the object 


stars, sporting or gambling heroes, of a handful of gilded princes or 
globe-trotting barons - in a word, the lives of great ivastrels (even if the 
imperative is often that they be shown, by contrast, in their daily 
'simplicity', doing their shopping, etc.)- With all these great dinosaurs 
who fill the magazines and TV programmes, it is always the excessive- 
ness of their lives, the potential for outrageous expenditure that is 
exalted. Their superhuman quality is the whiff of potlatch that attaches 
to them. In this way, they fulfil a very precise social function: that of 
sumptuary, useless, inordinate expenditure. They fulfil this function by 
proxy for the whole social body, like the kings, heroes, priests or great 
parvenus of bygone ages. Like them, indeed, they are never so great as 
when, like James Dean, they pay for this elevated position with their 
lives. 

The essential difference is that, in our current system, this spectacular 
squandering no longer has the crucial symbolic and collective significa- 
tion it could assume in primitive feasting and potlatch. This prestigious 
consumation, too, has been 'personalized' and mass-mediafied. Its func- 
tion is to provide the economic stimulus for mass consumption, which is 
defined in relation to it as a subculture of labour. The caricature of the 
magnificent dress which the star wears for just one evening are the 
'disposable panties' which, 80 per cent viscose and 20 per cent non- 
woven acrylic, can be put on in the morning and thrown away at night, 
and need no washing. Above all, this sublime, de luxe wastage high- 
lighted by the mass media merely replicates, on the cultural level, a 
much more fundamental and systematic wastage which, for its part, is 
integrated directly into economic processes, a functional, bureaucratic 
wastage produced by the production system as it produces material 
goods, a wastage built into them and, therefore, obligatorily consumed as 
one of the qualities and dimensions of objects of consumption: their 
fragility, their built-in obsolescence, their condemnation to transience. 
What is produced today is not produced for its use-value or its possible 
durability, but rather with an eye to its death, and the increase in the speed 
with which that death comes about is equalled only by the speed of price 
rises. This alone would be sufficient to throw into question the 'rational- 
istic' postulates of the whole of economic science on utility, needs, etc. 
Now, we know that the order of production only survives by paying the 
price of this extermination, this perpetual calculated 'suicide' of the mass 
of objects, and that this operation is based on technological 'sabotage' or 
organized obsolescence under cover of fashion. Advertising achieves the 
marvellous feat of consuming a substantial budget with the sole aim not 
of adding to the use-value of objects, but of subtracting value from them, of 
detracting from their time-value by subordinating them to their fashion- 
value and to ever earlier replacement. And we may leave aside here the 
colossal quantities of social wealth sacrificed on military budgets and 
other state and bureaucratic prestige expenditure: that kind of prodigal- 
ity no longer has any symbolic odour of potlatch about it; it is a 



The vicious circle of groivth 


47 


desperate, but vital solution for an economico-political system in dis- 
tress. This 'consumption' at the highest level is part of the consumer 
society, of the same order as the convulsive craving for objects at the 
level of the private individual. The two conjointly ensure the reproduc- 
tion of the order of production. And we have to distinguish individual or 
collective waste as a symbolic act of expenditure, as a festive ritual and 
an exalted form of socialization, from its gloomy, bureaucratic caricature 
in our societies, where wasteful consumption has become a daily obliga- 
tion, a forced and often unconscious institution like indirect taxation, a 
cool participation in the constraints of the economic order. 

'Smash up your car, the insurance will do the rest!' Indeed, the car is 
without doubt one of the main foci of daily and long-term waste, both 
private and collective. Not only is it so by its systematically reduced use- 
value, its systematically increased prestige and fashion coefficient, and 
the outrageous sums invested in it, but - without doubt much more 
deeply than this - by the spectacular collective sacrifice of sheet-metal, 
machinery and human lives in the Accident. The Accident: that gigantic 
'happening', the finest offered by consumer society, through which 
society affords itself in the ritual destruction of materials and life the 
proof of its excessive affluence (a proof a contrario, but one that is much 
more effective in the depths of the imagination than the direct proof by 
accumulation). 

The consumer society needs its objects in order to be. More precisely, it 
needs to destroy them. The use of objects leads only to their dwindling 
disappearance. The value created is much more intense in violent loss. This 
is why destruction remains the fundamental alternative to production: 
consumption is merely an intermediate term between the two. There is a 
profound tendency within consumption for it to surpass itself, to trans- 
figure itself in destruction. It is in destruction that it acquires its meaning. 
Most of the time in daily life today, it remains subordinate - as a 
managed consumptivity - to the order of productivity. This is why, most 
of the time, objects are present by their absence, and why their very 
abundance paradoxically signifies penury. Stock is the excessive expres- 
sion of lack and a mark of anxiety. Only in destruction are objects there in 
excess and only then, in their disappearance, do they attest to wealth. At 
any rate, it is clear that destruction, either in its violent and symbolic 
form (the happening, potlatch, destructive acting-out, both individual 
and collective) or in its form of systematic and institutional destructive- 
ness, is fated to become one of the preponderant functions of post- 
industrial society. 






PART II 

THE THEORY OF CONSUMPTION 


4 

The Social Logic of Consumption 


The Egalitarian Ideology of Well-Being 

The whole of the discourse on needs is based on a naive anthropology: 
that of the natural propensity to happiness. Happiness, written in letters 
of fire behind the least little advert for bathsalts or the Canary Islands, is 
the absolute reference of the consumer society: it is the strict equivalent 
of salvation. But what is this happiness which haunts modern civilization 
with such ideological force? 

Here again one has to revise all spontaneous conceptions. The ideo- 
logical force of the notion of happiness does not originate in a natural 
propensity on the part of each individual to realize that happiness for 
himself. It derives, socio-historically, from the fact that the myth of 
happiness is the one which, in modern societies, takes up and comes to 
embody the myth of Equality. All the political and sociological virulence 
with which that myth has been charged since the industrial revolution 
and the revolutions of the nineteenth century has been transferred to 
Happiness. The fact that Happiness initially has that signification and 
that ideological function has important consequences for its content: to 
be the vehicle of the egalitarian myth. Happiness has to be measurable. It 
has to be a ivell-being measurable in terms of objects and signs; it has to 
be 'comfort', as Tocqueville put it, already noting this trend of demo- 
cratic societies towards ever more well-being as a reduction of the impact 
of social misfortune and an equalization of all destinies. Happiness as 
total or inner enjoyment - that happiness independent of the signs which 
could manifest it to others and to those around us, the happiness which 
has no need of evidence - is therefore excluded from the outset from the 
consumer ideal in which happiness is, first and foremost, the demand for 
equality (or distinction, of course) and must, accordingly, always signify 
with 'regard' to visible criteria. In this sense. Happiness is even further 
removed from any collective 'feast' or exaltation since, fuelled by an 
egalitarian exigency, it is based on individualistic principles, fortified by 
the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen which explicitly 
recognize the right to Happiness of everyone (of each individual). 



50 


The theory of consumption 


The 'Revolution of Well-Being' is heir to, or executor of, the Bourgeois 
Revolution, or simply of any revolution which proclaims human equality 
as its principle without being able (or without wishing) fundamentally to 
bring it about. The democratic principle is then transferred from a real 
equality of capacities, of responsibilities, of social chances and of happi- 
ness (in the full sense of the term) to an equality before the Object and 
other manifest signs of social success and happiness. This is the democracy 
of social standing, the democracy of the TV, the car and the stereo, an 
apparently concrete but, in fact, equally formal democracy which, 
beyond contradictions and social inequalities, corresponds to the formal 
democracy enshrined in the Constitution. Both of these, the one serving 
as an alibi for the other, combine in a general democratic ideology which 
conceals the absence of democracy and the non-existence of equality. 

In the mystique of equality, the notion of 'needs' is indissociable from 
that of well-being. Needs point to a reassuring universe of ends, and this 
naturalistic anthropology lays the ground for the promise of a universal 
equality. The implicit argument is as follows: all men are equal before 
need and before the principle of satisfaction, since all men are equal 
before the use-value of objects and goods (whereas they are unequal and 
divided before exchange-value). Need being indexed to use-value, we 
have here a relationship of objective utility or natural finality, in the face 
of which there is no longer any social or historical inequality. At the 
meat-and-drink level (use-value), there are no proletarians, no privileged 
individuals. 

Thus the complementary myths of well-being and needs have a 
powerful ideological function of reducing, of eliminating the objective, 
social and historical, determinations of inequality. The whole political 
game of the welfare state and consumer society consists in surmounting 
their contradictions by increasing the volume of goods, with the prospect 
of an automatic equalization by quantity and a level of final equilibrium, 
which would be that of total well-being for all. Communist societies 
themselves speak in terms of equilibrium, of 'natural' individual or 
social needs, needs 'harmonized' and free of all social differentiation or 
class connotation. In this, they too drift from a political solution to a 
definitive solution by abundance, substituting the formal equality of 
goods for the social transparency of exchanges. Thus we also see the 
'Revolution of Well-Being' taking over from the social and political 
revolution in the socialist countries. 

If this perspective on the ideology of well-being is correct (namely, that 
that ideology is a vehicle for the myth of formal equality 'secularized' in 
goods and signs), then it is clear that the eternal problem of whether 
consumer society promotes or hinders equality, whether it is a fully 
achieved democracy (or on the way to being so) or the opposite - merely 
restoring earlier inequalities and social structures - is a false problem. 
Whether or not one is able to prove that consumption possibilities are 
being equalized (income differentials being flattened out, social re- 



The social logic of consumption 


51 


distribution, the same fashion for everyone, along with the same TV 
programmes and holiday destinations), this means nothing, since posing 
the problem in terms of the equalization of consumption is already to 
substitute the pursuit of objects and signs (level of substitution) for 
the real problems and their logical and sociological analysis. All in all, 
analysing Affluence does not mean seeking its verification in the statis- 
tics, which can only be as mythic as the myth, but radically changing 
focus and approaching the myth of Affluence with a logic other than its 
own. 

Analysis does, of course, require that we assess affluence in terms of 
figures, that we draw up the balance sheet of well-being. But the figures 
do not speak for themselves, and they never provide any counter- 
argument. Only interpretations speak, sometimes to one side of, some- 
times against, the figures. Let us listen to what they have to say. 

The most stubborn and unyielding of these is the idealist version: 

• growth means affluence; 

• affluence means democracy. 

It being impossible to conclude that this state of total felicity is imminent 
(even at the statistical level), the myth becomes more 'realistic' and we 
have the ideal-reformist variant: the large-scale inequalities of the first 
phase of growth are diminishing, there is no 'iron law' any longer, 
incomes are becoming harmonized. The hypothesis of a smooth, con- 
tinuous progress towards ever more equality is, of course, refuted by 
certain facts (the 'Other America': 20 per cent living in poverty, etc.). But 
these point to a temporary dysfunction, to teething troubles. Growth, 
while producing certain inegalitarian effects, implies an overall, long- 
term democratization. Thus, in Galbraith's view, the problem of 
equality/ inequality is no longer relevant. It was linked to the problem of 
wealth and poverty and the structures of the 'affluent' society have 
resolved the problem, despite an unequal redistribution. The 'poor' (the 
20 per cent) are those who remain, for one reason or another, outside the 
industrial system, outside growth. The principle of growth itself remains 
inviolate; it is homogeneous and is tending to homogenize the entire 
social body. 

The basic question which arises at this level is the question of this 
'poverty'. For the idealists of affluence, it is 'residual'; it will be cleared 
up by additional growth. Yet it seems to carry on down the post- 
industrial generations and all efforts to eliminate it (particularly in the 
USA, with the 'great society') seem to run up against some mechanism of 
the system which seems to reproduce it functionally at each stage of 
development, like a kind of drag on growth, a kind of mechanism 
indispensable to the general wealth. Should we believe Galbraith when 
he imputes this inexplicable residual poverty to the dysfunctions of the 
system (the priority accorded to military and other wasteful expenditure, 
a lagging of public services behind private consumption, etc.) or should 



52 


The theory of consumption 


we turn his argument around and conclude that growth, in its very 
dynamic, is based on this disequilibrium ? Galbraith is very contradictory on 
this: all his analyses tend to demonstrate in a sense hozv its defects are 
functionally implicated in the system of growth, yet he recoils before the 
logical conclusions which would challenge the system itself and recasts 
everything in a liberal perspective. 

Generally, the idealists do not go beyond this paradoxical affirmation: 
in spite of everything, and by a devilish inversion of its aims (which, as 
everyone knows, cannot but be beneficent), growth produces, reproduces 
and restores social inequality, privileges, disequilibria, etc. They will 
admit, for example, as Galbraith does in The Affluent Society, that, 
ultimately, it is an increase in production which takes over the re- 
distributive role ('As there comes to be more and more ... so there will 
in the end be enough for everyone' - these principles, based on the 
physics of fluids, are never true in a social relations context, where, as we 
shall see below, things work in precisely the opposite way). Moreover, 
from these principles, Galbraith derives an argument for the under- 
privileged, to the effect that even those on the bottom rung of the ladder 
have more to gain from an accelerated growth of production than from 
any other form of redistribution. But this is all specious: for, if growth 
grants everyone access to an income and a volume of goods which are 
higher in absolute terms, what is sociologically characteristic is the 
process of distortion which sets in at the very heart of growth. It is the rate 
of distortion which subtly structures growth and gives it its true meaning. 
It is so much easier to content oneself with the spectacular disappearance 
of a particular extreme form of penury or certain secondary inequalities, 
to assess affluence by statistics and general quantities, by absolute increa- 
ses and gross national products, than to analyse it in terms of structures! 
Structurally, it is the rate of distortion which is significant. It is that rate 
which, at an international level, marks the growing distance between the 
underdeveloped countries and the overdeveloped nations, and also, 
within those nations, the lower incomes falling further behind the higher, 
failing industries losing ground to the high-technology sectors, rural 
areas losing out to urban, industrial areas, etc. Chronic inflation allows 
this relative pauperization to be masked, by revising all nominal values 
upwards, whereas the calculation of the relative functions and averages 
would show up instances of partial decline at the bottom of the scale, 
and, at any event, a structural distortion throughout. There is no point 
constantly arguing that this is temporary or conjunctural when one sees 
the whole logic of the system sustaining it and the system indeed 
depending upon it for the fulfilment of its aims. At best, we can say the 
system stabilizes around a certain rate of distortion or, in other words, 
stabilizes, whatever the absolute volume of wealth, at a point which includes 
a systematic inequality. 

The only way, in fact, to escape the idealist dead-end of this gloomy 
listing of dysfunctions is to admit that there is a systematic logic at work 



The social logic of consumption 


53 


here. It is also the only way of getting beyond the false problematic of 
abundance and scarcity which, like votes of confidence in parliamentary 
circles, functions to stifle all discussion. 

There is not in fact - and never has been - any 'affluent society', any 
more than there is an 'indigent society', since every society of whatever 
kind and whatever the volume of goods produced or available wealth is geared 
both to a structural excess and a structural penury. The excess may be the 
portion set aside for the gods or for sacrifice; it may be sumptuary 
expenditure, surplus value, economic profit or prestige budgets. It is, at 
any rate, that luxury levy which defines both the wealth of a society 
and its social structure, since it is always the prerogative of a 
privileged minority and its function is precisely to reproduce caste or 
class privilege. At the sociological level there is no equilibrium. Equilib- 
rium is the ideal fantasy of economists which is contradicted, if not by 
the very logic of society as a condition, then at least by all known forms 
of social organization. Every society produces differentiation, social 
discrimination, and that structural organization is based on the use and 
distribution of wealth (among other things). The fact that a society enters 
upon a phase of growth, as our industrial society has done, changes 
nothing in this process. Quite the contrary, indeed, in a certain way the 
capitalist system (and the productivist system in general) has been the 
culmination of that functional unlevelling, that disequilibrium, by ration- 
alizing it and generalizing it in all respects. The spirals of growth are 
arrayed around the same structural axis. As soon as the fiction of GDP is 
abandoned as the criterion of affluence, we have to admit that growth 
neither takes us further from, nor brings us closer to, affluence. It is logically 
separated from it by the whole social structure which is, here, the determin- 
ing instance. A certain type of social relations and social contradictions, a 
certain type of 'inequality', which used to perpetuate itself in the absence 
of economic progress, is today reproduced in and through growth . 1 

This means that we must take another view of growth. We shall no 
longer say with the enthusiasts: 'Growth produces affluence and there- 
fore equality.' Nor shall we take the extreme opposite view: 'Growth 
produces inequality.' Overturning the false problem of whether growth 
is egalitarian or inegalitarian, we shall say that it is growth itself which 
is a function of inequality. It is the need of the inegalitarian social order 
- the social structure of privilege - to maintain itself that produces and 
reproduces growth as its strategic element. To put it yet another way, 
the internal autonomy of (technological, economic) growth is weak 
and secondary by comparison with that determination by the social 
structure. 

Growth society is, overall, the product of a compromise between 
egalitarian democratic principles, which for support within that society 
can draw on the myths of Affluence and Well-Being, and the funda- 
mental imperative of maintaining an order of privilege and domination. 



54 


The theory of consumption 


That society is not founded on technological progress. It is that mechan- 
istic view which fuels the naive illusion of future affluence. It is, rather, 
this contradictory dual determination which underpins the possibility of 
technological progress. It is this determination too which governs the 
emergence in our contemporary societies of certain egalitarian, demo- 
cratic, 'progressive' processes. But it must be recognized that these only 
emerge there in homoeopathic doses, drip-fed out by the system to ensure 
its survival. In this systematic process, equality itself is a (secondary and 
derived) function of inequality. As is growth. The tendency for incomes 
to be equalized, for example (for it is chiefly at this level that the 
egalitarian myth operates), is necessary to the internalization of growth 
processes - an internalization which, as we have seen, contributes 
tactically to the reproduction of the social order, which is a structure 
of privilege and class power. All this points to the few symptoms of 
democratization as being alibis essential to the viability of the system. 

These few symptoms are, moreover, themselves superficial and sus- 
pect. Galbraith rejoices at the decline in importance of inequality as an 
economic (and, hence, social) problem - not that it has disappeared, as he 
says, but because wealth no longer brings with it the fundamental 
advantages (power, enjoyment, prestige, distinction) it once implied. The 
power of property-owners and stockholders is at an end; it is now 
experts and organized technicians who exercise power, if not indeed 
intellectuals and scientists! The conspicuous consumption of the great 
capitalists, the 'Citizen Kanes', is over, and there are no great fortunes 
any more. Indeed, the rich feel almost duty-bound to underconsume. In 
short, without wishing to do so, Galbraith clearly shows that if there is 
equality (if poverty and wealth are no longer a problem), it is precisely 
because equality no longer has any real importance. Things have moved 
on; the criteria of value are now elsewhere. Social discrimination, power 
and so on - those things which remain the key factors - have been shifted 
away from income or wealth pure and simple. It is of little consequence, 
in these conditions, if all incomes are in the end equal; the system can 
even afford the luxury of making a great step in that direction, for the 
fundamental determination of 'inequality' is no longer to be found there. 
Knowledge, culture, the structures of responsibility and decision- 
making, and influence are all criteria which, though still largely asso- 
ciated with wealth and level of income, have to a great extent relegated 
these latter - together with external marks of status - in the order of the 
social determinants of value, in the hierarchy of criteria of 'power'. 
Galbraith, for example, confuses the 'underconsumption' of the rich with 
the abolition of criteria of prestige based on money. Now, admittedly, the 
rich man who drives a 2CV no longer bedazzles. What he does is more 
subtle: he super-differentiates himself, super-distinguishes himself by his 
manner of consuming, by style. He maintains his privilege absolutely by 
moving from conspicuous to discreet (super-conspicuous) consumption. 



The social logic of consumption 55 

by moving from quantitative ostentation to distinction, from money to 
culture. 

In fact, even this argument, which we might term the thesis of the 
'tendency of the rate of economic privilege to tali', is not certain. For 
money always transmutes itself into hierarchical privilege, into a privil- 
ege of power and culture. We may accept that it is no longer decisive (has 
it ever been?). What Galbraith and the others fail to see is that the very 
fact that (economic) inequality is no longer a problem in itself constitutes 
a problem. Registering a little too hastily the abatement of the 'iron law' 
in the economic field, they then go no further, and fail to produce a 
broader theory of this 'iron law' or to see how it shifts from the field of 
incomes and 'consumption' - henceforth blessed by Affluence - to a 
much more general social field where, functioning more subtly, it makes 
itself all the more irreversible. 

The Industrial System and Poverty 

When one examines the problem of the industrial system objectively in its 
entirety, cutting through all the liturgy of growth and affluence, one sees 
that all the possible positions boil down to two fundamental options: 

1 The Galbraith option (shared by so many others). This magical- 
idealist position consists in expelling from the system all the negative 
phenomena - dysfunctions, nuisances, poverty - on the grounds that 
these are admittedly deplorable but accidental, residual and eventu- 
ally remediable. In this way, the enchanted orbit of growth is 
preserved. 

2 The view that the system survives on disequilibrium and structural 
penury, that its logic is totally ambivalent, and that it is so not merely 
conjuncturally but structurally. The system only sustains itself by 
producing wealth and poverty, by producing as many dissatisfactions 
as satisfactions, as much nuisance as 'progress'. Its only logic is to 
survive and its strategy in this regard is to keep human society out of 
kilter, in perpetual deficit. We know the system has traditionally and 
powerfully drawn on the aid of war to survive and to revive. Today 
the mechanisms and functions of war have been integrated into the 
economic system and the mechanisms of daily life. 

If one accepts this structural paradox of growth, from which the contra- 
dictions and paradoxes of affluence derive, then it is naive and mystif ica- 
tory to confuse the logical processes of social underdevelopment with the 
poor, the 20 per cent of 'underprivileged', the individuals 'thrown on the 
scrapheap'. Those processes cannot be located in real persons, in real 
places, in real groups. By the same token, they cannot be eliminated by 
the billions of dollars which have been thrown at the lower classes, or by 
the massive redistribution programmes to 'dispel poverty' and provide 
equal life-chances (all this being got up as the 'new frontier', 2 a social 



56 


The theory of consumption 


ideal to tug at the heart strings). We have to acknowledge at times that 
the 'great societists' themselves believe in all this, their bewilderment at 
the failure of their 'unremitting, generous' efforts being only the more 
comical for that fact. 

If poverty and nuisance cannot be eliminated, this is because they are 
anywhere but in the poor neighbourhoods. They are not in the slums or 
shanty-towns, but in the socio-economic structure. Yet this is precisely 
what has to be concealed, what must not be said, and indeed billions of 
dollars are spent on hiding the fact (in the same way, heavy medical and 
pharmaceutical expenditure may be necessary to avoid admitting that a 
problem is not what it appears to be, and may, for example, be psycho- 
logical in nature - the well-known process of 'denial'). A society, like an 
individual, may ruin itself in this way, trying to escape analysis. Now, it 
is true here that analysis would be lethal for the system itself. So the 
sacrifice of useless millions in the struggle against what is merely the 
visible phantom of poverty is not too high a price to pay if it means that 
the myth of growth is preserved. We have to go even further and 
acknowledge that this real poverty is a myth - and one in which the myth 
of growth glories, pretending to battle fiercely against it and yet keeping 
it alive all the same as its secret goals require. 

Having said this, we should not believe that it is because they are 
deliberately bloodthirsty and odious that the industrial or capitalist sys- 
tems continually regenerate poverty or identify with the arms race. 
Moralistic analysis (which neither liberals nor Marxists escape) is 
always a mistake. If the system could find an equilibrium or survive on 
foundations other than unemployment, underdevelopment and military 
expenditure, it would do so. And on occasion it does. When it can safely 
maintain its power by way of beneficial social effects, by way of 
'affluence', it does not fail to do so. It is not opposed on principle to the 
social 'spin-offs' of progress. It takes both nuclear power and the well- 
being of citizens as its objective, simultaneously and without distinction: 
the point is that, in its eyes, the two are ultimately equal as contents and 
its final goal lies elsewhere. 

The simple fact is that, at the strategic level, it turns out that military 
expenditures (for example) are more reliable, easier to monitor and more 
effective in achieving the survival and goals of the system as a whole 
than education - as is also the case with motor cars rather than hospitals, 
colour televisions rather than playgrounds, etc. But that negative dis- 
crimination does not apply to public services as such. Things are much 
more serious than this: the system knoivs only the conditions of its survival, it 
knozvs nothing of social and individual contents. That should forearm us 
against a number of (typically social-reformist) illusions: the illusions 
which involve a belief that one can change the system by modifying its 
contents (transferring military expenditures to education etc.). Moreover, 
the paradox is that all these social demands are, slowly but surely, taken 
up and realized by the system itself, thus slipping through the fingers of 



The social logic of consumption 


57 


those who turn them into a political platform. Consumption, informa- 
tion, communication, culture, affluence - all these things are today set in 
place, discovered and organized by the system itself, as new productive 
forces, for its greater glory. It too is changing over (relatively) from a 
violent to a non-violent structure: it is substituting affluence and con- 
sumption for exploitation and war. But it will win no affection for this, 
since it is not actually changing, but merely obeying its own laws. 


The New Segregations 

Not only affluence, but nuisance too has been taken up into the social 
logic. The ascendancy of the urban and industrial milieu is producing 
new examples of shortage: shortages of space and time, fresh air, 
greenery, water, silence. Certain goods, which were once free and abund- 
antly available, are becoming luxuries accessible only to the privileged, 
while manufactured goods or services are offered on a mass scale. 

The relative homogenization at the level of essential goods is thus 
being accompanied by a 'slippage' of values and a new hierarchy of 
utilities. The distortion and inequality are not reduced; they are trans- 
ferred elsewhere. Everyday consumer objects are becoming less and less 
expressive of social rank. And incomes themselves, in so far as the great 
disparities are being reduced, are losing their value as a distinctive 
criterion. It is even possible that consumption (taken in the sense of 
expenditure, of the purchase and possession of visible objects) will 
gradually concede to other criteria and other types of behaviour the pre- 
eminent role it currently plays in the variable geometry of status. 
Ultimately, it ivill become the prerogative of everyone when it no longer has any 
meaning. 

We are already seeing the social hierarchy being registered in more 
subtle criteria: type of work and responsibility, level of education and 
culture (the way of consuming everyday goods may itself be a kind of 
'scarce commodity'), participation in decision-making. Knowledge and 
power are, or are going to become, the two great scarce commodities of 
our affluent societies. 

But these abstract criteria do not prevent us, even today, from reading 
a growing discrimination in other concrete signs. Segregation by place of 
residence is not new, but, being increasingly linked to a consciously 
induced shortage and chronic speculation, it is tending to become 
decisive, in terms of both geographical segregation (town centres and 
outskirts, residential zones, rich ghettos, dormitory suburbs, etc.) and 
habitable space (the inside and outside of the dwelling, the addition of a 
'second home', etc.). Objects are less important today than space and the 
social marking of space. Habitat thus perhaps has an opposite function to 
that of other consumables. The latter have a homogenizing function, the 
former a differentiating function in terms of space and location. 



58 


The theory of consumption 


Nature, space, dean air, silence - it is the incidence of the pursuit of 
these scarce commodities and their high price which we read in the 
differential indices of expenditure between two categories at opposite 
ends of the social spectrum. The difference in expenditure between 
workers and senior managers on essential goods is 100:135, but it 
is 100:245 on household equipment, 100:305 on transport and 100:390 
on leisure. One should not see these figures as showing a quantitative 
graduation within a homogeneous space of consumption, but see, 
through them, the social discrimination attaching to the quality of goods 
sought after. 

There is much talk of the right to health, to space, to beauty, to 
holidays, to knowledge and to culture. And, as these new rights emerge, 
so ministries emerge with them, such as the Ministries of Health, or of 
Leisure. And why not add Beauty and Clean Air? This whole phenom- 
enon, which seems to express a general individual and collective 
advance, rewarded in the end with embodiment in institutions, is 
ambiguous in its meaning and one might, as it were, see it as represent- 
ing quite the opposite: there is no right to space until there no longer is space 
for everyone, and until space and silence are the privilege of some at the 
expense of others. Just as there was no 'right to property' until there was 
no longer land for everyone and there was no right to work until work 
became, within the framework of the division of labour, an exchangeable 
commodity, i.e. one which no longer belonged specifically to individuals. 
We might ask whether the 'right to leisure' does not, similarly, mean that 
leisure too has reached the stage of technical and social division which 
work did before it and has thus, in fact, come to an end. 

The appearance of these new social rights, brandished as slogans and 
emblazoned on the democratic banner of the affluent society, is in fact 
symptomatic, therefore, of the elements concerned acquiring the status of 
distinctive signs and class (or caste) privileges. The 'right to clean air' 
signifies the loss of clean air as a natural good, its transition to commodity 
status and its inegalitarian social redistribution. One should not mistake for 
objective social progress (something being entered as a right in the tables 
of the law) what is simply the advance of the capitalist system - i.e. the 
progressive transformation of all concrete and natural values into 
productive forms, i.e. into sources 

1 of economic profit; 

2 of social privilege. 


A Class Institution 

Consumption no more homogenizes the social body than the educational 
system homogenizes cultural opportunities. It even highlights the 
disparities within it. One is tempted to regard consumption and the 



The social logic of consumption 


59 


growing participation in the same(?) goods and the same(?) products, 
both material and cultural, as a corrective to social disparities, social 
hierarchy and the ever increasing level of discrimination where power 
and responsibilities are concerned. In fact, the ideology of consumption, 
like that of education (i.e. the representation one has of a total equality 
before the electric razor or the car, like the representation one has of a 
total equality before writing and reading), does indeed play this role. 
Everyone today can read and write; everyone has (or will have) the same 
washing machine and buys the same paperbacks. But this equality is 
entirely formal: though bearing on what is most concrete, it is in fact 
abstract. And it is, by contrast, on this homogeneous abstract base, on 
this foundation of the abstract democracy of spelling or the TV set, that the 
real system of discrimination is able to operate - and to operate all the 
more effectively. 

In actual fact, it is not even true that consumer products, the signs of 
this social institution, establish this primary democratic platform: for, 
in themselves, and taken individually (the car, the razor, etc.), they have 
no meaning: it is their constellation, their configuration, the relation to 
these objects and their overall social 'perspective' which alone have a 
meaning. And that meaning is always a distinctive one. They them- 
selves, in their materiality as signs (their subtle differences), reflect that 
structural determination. Like education, they obey the same social 
logic as other institutions, even in the inverted image they give of that 
logic. 

Consumption, like the education system, is a class institution: not only 
is there inequality before objects in the economic sense (the purchase, 
choice and use of objects are governed by purchasing power and by 
educational level, which is itself dependent upon class background, etc.) 

- in short, not everyone has the same objects, just as not everyone has the 
same educational chances - but, more deeply, there is radical discrimina- 
tion in the sense that only some people achieve mastery of an autonom- 
ous, rational logic of the elements of the environment (functional use, 
aesthetic organization, cultural accomplishment). Such people do not 
really deal with objects and do not, strictly speaking, 'consume', 
whilst the others are condemned to a magical economy, to the valor- 
ization of objects as such, and of all other things as objects (ideas, leisure, 
knowledge, culture): this fetishistic logic is, strictly, the ideology of 
consumption. 

Similarly, for those who do not have the key to them - that is to say, 
the code which admits one to their legitimate, rational and effective use 

- knowledge and culture are merely the occasion of a sharper, subtler 
cultural segregation, since knowledge and culture merely appear in their 
eyes, and in the use they make of them, as a supplementary mana, a 
reserve of magic power, instead of being the opposite: a learning process 
and an objective training . 3 



60 


The theory of consumption 


A Salvational Dimension 

By their number, redundancy superfluity and formal extravagance, by 
the play of fashion and all that exceeds pure and simple function in 
them, objects merely simulate the social essence - status - that grace of 
predestination which is only ever bestowed by birth to a few and which 
the majority, having opposite destinies, can never attain. This hereditary 
legitimacy (whether of blood or of culture) is at the very heart of the 
concept of status, the key concept in the whole dynamics of social 
mobility Underlying all aspirations, there is this ideal end of a status by 
birth, a status of grace and excellence. And status also haunts the 
environment of objects. It is status which arouses this frenzy, this berserk 
world of knick-knacks, gadgets, fetishes, all of which seek to mark out a 
value for all eternity and prove salvation by zvorks, since salvation by grace 
is unattainable. Hence the very particular prestige of the ancient object, 
which is a sign of heredity, of innate value, of irreversible grace. 

It is a class logic which imposes salvation by objects. That is a salvation 
by zvorks, which, in its 'democratic' nature, stands opposed to the 
aristocratic principle of salvation by grace and election. Now, in the 
universal consensus, salvation by grace always wins out over salvation 
by works. This is to some degree what we see among the lower and 
middle classes, where 'proving oneself by objects' - salvation by con- 
sumption - in its endless process of moral demonstration, battles 
despairingly to attain a status of personal grace, of god-givenness and 
predestination. That remains, nonetheless, the preserve of the upper 
classes, who prove their excellence elsewhere, in the display of their 
culture and the exercise of their power. 


Differentiation and Growth Society 

All this leads us, then, beyond the Metaphysics of Needs and Affluence, 
to a genuine analysis of the social logic of consumption. That logic is by 
no means that of the individual appropriation of the use-value of goods 
and services - a logic of unequal abundance, some having rightful access 
to the miracle, others merely to the by-products of the miracle. It is a 
logic not of satisfaction, but of the production and manipulation of social 
signifiers. The process of consumption may be analysed within this 
perspective from two basic angles: 

1 As a process of signification and communication, based on a code into 
which consumption practices fit and from which they derive their 
meaning. Consumption here is a system of exchange, and the 
equivalent of a language. Structural analysis is the appropriate 
approach at this level. We shall come back to this below. 

2 As a process of classification and social differentiation in which sign/ 
objects are ordered not now merely as significant differences in a code 



The social logic of consumption 


61 


but as status values in a hierarchy. Here consumption can be sub- 
mitted to a strategic analysis which determines its specific import- 
ance in the distribution of status values (overlapping with other 
social signifiers: knowledge, power, culture, etc.). 

The principle of analysis remains as follows: you never consume the 
object in itself (in its use-value); you are always manipulating objects (in 
the broadest sense) as signs which distinguish you either by affiliating 
you to your own group taken as an ideal reference or by marking you off 
from your group by reference to a group of higher status. 

Yet, this process of status differentiation, which is a fundamental social 
process by which everyone takes their place within society, has a lived 
aspect and a structural aspect, the one conscious, the other unconscious, 
the one ethical (the morality of social standing, of status rivalry, of the 
ladder of prestige), the other structural. One is permanently governed by 
a code whose rules and meaning-constraints - like those of language - 
are, for the most part, beyond the grasp of individuals. 

The consumer experiences his distinctive behaviours as freedom, as 
aspiration, as choice. His experience is not one of being forced to be 
different, of obeying a code. To differentiate oneself is always, by the same 
token, to bring into play the total order of differences, which is, from the 
first, the product of the total society and inevitably exceeds the scope of 
the individual. In the very act of scoring his points in the order of 
differences, each individual maintains that order, and therefore con- 
demns himself only ever to occupy a relative position within it. Each 
individual experiences his differential social gains as absolute gains; he 
does not experience the structural constraint which means that positions 
change, but the order of differences remains. 

Yet it is this constraint of relativity which is crucial, in so far as it is with 
reference to this that the differential occupation of positions zvill never 
end. It alone can account for the fundamental character of consumption, 
its unlimited character, a dimension which cannot be explained by any 
theory of needs and satisfaction, since, if the calculation were made in 
terms of a calorific or energy balance sheet or of use-values, a saturation 
point would very soon be reached. But we very clearly see the opposite 
happening: an acceleration of the rate of consumption, increased 
pressure on demand, which means that the gap between a giant-scale 
productivity and an even more frantic propensity to consume is, in fact, 
growing wider (meanwhile, affluence, understood as the harmonious 
matching of the two, recedes indefinitely). This can only be explained if 
we radically abandon the individual logic of satisfaction and accord the 
social logic of differentiation the decisive importance it deserves. And if 
we distinguish that logic of difference from mere conscious determina- 
tions of prestige, since these latter are still satisfactions, the consumption 
of positive differences, whereas the sign or mark of distinction is always 
both a positive and a negative difference - this is why it refers on 



62 The theory of consumption 

indefinitely to other signs and impels the consumer on to definitive 
dissatisfaction. 4 

The alarm of economists and other idealist theorists of well-being at 
the clear inability of the consumption system to stabilize - at its 
uncontrolled, runaway character - is always very instructive. It is 
characteristic of their way of seeing things in terms of increases in goods 
and incomes - and never in terms of relation and differentiation by signs. 
Thus Gervasi writes: 'Growth is accompanied by the constant introduc- 
tion of new products as the rise in incomes expands the scope for 
consumption.' 'The rising trend of incomes brings not only a wave of 
new products, but also a proliferation of different qualities for the same 
product.' (Why? What is the logical relation?) 'The rise in incomes leads 
to a progressive improvement in quality.' We have here again the same 
implicit thesis: 'The more you earn, the more you want, and better', this 
being true of everyone individually, without distinction, each person 
seeking a rational optimum of well-being. 

Very generally, moreover, the field of consumption is a homogeneous 
one for them (with, at most, some disparities of income or 'cultural' 
disparities in it), which fans out statistically around an average type: the 
'consumer'. This is a view induced by the conception of American 
society as an immense middle class - and European sociology has now, 
largely, fallen in with that view. In fact, the field of consumption is a 
structured social field, where not only goods, but needs themselves, like 
the various cultural characteristics, pass from a key group, a leading 
elite, to the other social categories as these 'rise' relatively on the social 
ladder. There is no 'mass of consumers' and no need emerges spontan- 
eously from the grassroots consumer: needs have no chance of appearing 
in the 'standard package' of needs if they have not already been part of 
the 'select package'. The path of needs, like the path of objects and goods, 
is thus first socially selective: needs and satisfactions trickle down in 
accordance with an absolute principle, a kind of social categorical 
imperative which is the maintenance of distance and of differentiation by 
signs. It is this law which conditions all introduction of new objects as 
distinctive social material. It is this law of the 'top-down' replenishment 
of distinctive material which runs through the whole world of consump- 
tion, not the rise in incomes, which runs in the opposite direction (from 
the bottom up, towards total homogeneity). 

No product has any chance of being mass-produced, no need has any 
chance of being satisfied on a mass scale unless it has already ceased to 
form part of the higher model and has been replaced by some other 
distinctive good or need - such that the distance is preserved. Popular- 
ization occurs only as a function of selective innovation at the top. And 
that process occurs, of course, as a function of the 'falling rate of 
distinction' of objects and goods in a growth society. Here again some 
preconceptions are in need of revision: popularization has its own 
mechanics (the mass media, etc.), but it has no logic of its own regarding 



The social logic of consumption 


63 


content. It is within the upper echelons of society, as a reaction against 
the loss of earlier distinctive markers, that innovation takes place, in 
order to restore social distance. As a result, the needs of the middle and 
lower classes are always, like objects, subject to a certain backwardness; 
they lag temporally and culturally behind the needs of the upper classes. 
This is a not insignificant form of segregation in so-called democratic 
society. 

One of the contradictions of growth is that it produces goods and 
needs at the same time, but does not produce them at the same rate - the 
rate of production of goods being dependent on industrial and economic 
productivity, the rate of production of needs on the logic of social 
differentiation. Now, the upward and irreversible mobility of the needs 
'set free' by growth (i.e. produced by the industrial system as it obeys its 
internal logical constraints ) 5 has its own dynamic, which is different from 
the dynamic of the production of the material and cultural goods 
supposedly meant to satisfy those needs. Beyond a certain level of urban 
socialization, status competition and psychological 'take-off', aspiration 
is irreversible and unlimited, and develops to a rhythm of accelerated 
socio-differentiation and generalized interrelativity. Hence the specific 
problems linked to this 'differential' dynamic of consumption. If aspira- 
tions were simply concurrent with productivity, subordinate to it, there 
would be no problem. In fact, by their very own logic, which is a logic of 
difference, they constitute an uncontrollable variable. They are not just 
another variable in the economic calculation - a socio-cultural variable of 
situation or context - but a crucial structural variable which governs all 
others. 

We must, admittedly, accept (as the various studies on this point, 
particularly on cultural needs, have done) a certain sociological inertia of 
needs. In other words, a certain indexing of needs and aspirations to the 
social position achieved (and not in the least, as conditioning theorists 
believe, to the goods on offer). Once again at this level, we find the same 
processes which are those of social mobility. A certain 'realism' means 
that people in a particular social situation never have aspirations much 
beyond what they can reasonably hope to attain. By having aspirations a 
little beyond their objective chances, they internalize the official norms of 
a growth society. By having aspirations which are little beyond, they 
internalize the real norms of expansion of that society (Malthusian even 
in its expansion) which are always short of what is possible. The less one 
has, the lower one's aspirations (at least up to a certain threshold, where 
total unrealism takes over to compensate for destitution). Thus, the very 
process of the production of aspirations is inegalitarian, since resignation at 
the bottom end of the social scale and freer aspirations at the top 
compound the inequality of objective possibilities of satisfaction. Here 
again, however, the problem must be seen in the round: it is quite 
possible that strictly consumer aspirations (material and cultural) - 
which, for their part, display a much greater degree of elasticity than 



64 


The theory of consumption 


professional or cultural aspirations - in fact compensate for the serious 
underachievement of certain classes in terms of social mobility. The 
compulsion to consume might be said to compensate for failure to rise 
up the vertical social ladder. At the same time as expressing a status 
demand, the aspirations to 'overconsume' (on the part of the lower 
classes in particular) might be seen as expressing the felt failure of that 
demand. 

The fact remains that needs and aspirations, activated by social 
differentiation and demands for status, tend in a growth society always 
to progress a little more quickly than available goods or objective 
chances. Moreover, the industrial system itself, which presupposes the 
growth of needs, also presupposes a perpetual excess of needs over the 
supply of goods (in the same way as it speculates on a reserve of 
unemployment to maximize the profit it extracts from labour power: we 
meet here once again the deep-level analogy between needs and pro- 
ductive forces ). 6 Speculating upon this discrepancy between goods and 
needs, the system does, however, verge on a contradiction in that growth 
not only implies the growth of needs and a certain disequilibrium 
between goods and needs, but further implies the grozvth of that very 
disequilibrium between the growth of needs and the growth of productiv- 
ity. Hence the 'psychological pauperization' and the chronic, latent state 
of crisis, which is itself functionally linked to growth, but which can lead 
to a point of breakdown, an explosive contradiction. 

Confronting the growth of needs and the growth of production means 
bringing out the decisive 'intermediate' variable that is differentiation. 
Hence, it is the increasing differentiation of products and the increasing 
differentiation of the social demand for prestige that must be seen in 
their interrelations . 7 Now, the former is limited, whereas the latter is not. 
There are no limits to man's 'needs' as a social being (i.e. as a being 
productive of meaning and relative to others in value). The quantitative 
intake of food is limited, the digestive system is limited, but the cultural 
system of food is, for its part, indefinite. And it is, moreover, a relatively 
contingent system. The strategic value of advertising - and also its trick 
- is precisely this: that it targets everyone in their relation to others, in their 
hankerings after reified social prestige. It is never addressed to a lone 
individual, but is aimed at human beings in their differential relations 
and, even when it seems to tap into their 'deep' motivations, it always 
does so in spectacular fashion. That is to say, it always calls in their 
friends and relations, the group, and society, all hierarchically ordered 
within the process of reading and interpretation, the process of 'setting- 
off' or 'showing-off' \faire-valoir] which it sets in train. 

In a small group, needs, like competition, can doubtless stabilize. 
There is less of an escalation in the signifiers of status and the stuff of 
distinction. We can see this in traditional societies or micro-groups. But, 
in a society of industrial and urban concentration such as our own, 
where people are crowded together at much greater levels of density, the 



The social logic of consumption 


65 


demand for differentiation grows even more quickly than material 
productivity. When the whole social world becomes urbanized, when 
communication becomes total, 'needs' grow exponentially - not from the 
growth of appetite, but from competition. 

That escalation, that differential 'chain reaction', sanctioned by the 
total dictatorship of fashion, has the urban space as its locus. (And, 
reciprocally, the process reinforces urban concentration by rapid accul- 
turation of the rural or marginal areas. It is, therefore, irreversible. Any 
vague desire to halt it is naive.) Human density in itself exerts a 
fascination. But the language of cities is competition itself. Motives, 
desires, encounters, stimuli, the endless judgements of others, continual 
eroticization, information, the appeals of advertising: all these things 
make up a kind of abstract destiny of collective participation, set against 
a real background of generalized competition. 

Just as industrial concentration results in an ever increased production 
of goods, so urban concentration results in a limitless promotion of 
needs. Now, though the two types of concentration are contempor- 
aneous, they nonetheless have their own dynamics, as we have seen, and 
their results do not coincide. Urban concentration (and hence differ- 
entiation) outstrips productivity. That is the basis of urban alienation. A 
neurotic equilibrium does, however, establish itself in the end, somewhat 
to the advantage of the more coherent order of production - the 
proliferation of needs washing back over the order of products, and 
becoming integrated into it after a fashion. 

All this defines the growth society as the opposite of an affluent society. 
Thanks to this constant tension between competitive needs and produc- 
tion, thanks to this shortage-based tension, to this 'psychological pauper- 
ization', the order of production manages only to give rise to - and only 
to 'satisfy' - the needs appropriate to it. In the growth-based order, there 
are, by this logic, no autonomous needs and there cannot be any. There 
are only the needs of groivth. There is no place for individual goals in the 
system; there is room only for the goals of the system. All the dysfunc- 
tions pointed out by Galbraith, Bertrand de Jouvenel, etc., are logical. It is 
reasonably clear that cars and motorways are a need of the system, but 
so is the university training of middle managers. Hence the 'democrat- 
ization' of the university is as much a systemic need as car production . 8 
Because the system produces only for its own needs, it is all the readier 
systematically to hide behind the alibi of individual needs. Hence the 
gigantic growth of private consumption by comparison with public 
services (Galbraith). This is no accident. The cult of individual spon- 
taneity and the naturalness of needs is, by its nature, father to the 
productivist option. Even the most 'rational' needs (education, culture, 
health, transport, leisure), cut off from their real collective significance, 
are taken up, in the same way as the incidental needs deriving from 
growth, into the systematic future perspectives of that growth. 



66 


The theory of consumption 


Furthermore, it is in an even deeper sense that growth society is the 
opposite of an affluent society. Before being a society productive of 
goods, it is in fact a society productive of privileges. Now, there is a 
necessary, sociologically definable relationship between privilege and 
penury. There could not (in any society whatever) be privilege without 
penury. The two are structurally linked. Growth is, therefore, by its social 
logic, paradoxically defined by the reproduction of a structural penury. 
That penury no longer has the same sense as primary penury (a dearth of 
goods): that could be regarded as provisional and it is, in part, overcome 
in our societies, but the structural penury which substitutes for it is 
definitive since it is systematized as a booster function and power strategy 
in the very logic of the order of growth. 

In conclusion, we shall state that there is, at any event, a logical 
contradiction between the ideological hypothesis of growth society, 
which is social homogenization at the highest level, and its concrete 
social logic, based on a structural differentiation - this logically contra- 
dictory whole forming the basis of an overall strategy. 

And, lastly, we shall once again stress the major illusion, the cardinal 
myth of this false affluent society: the illusion of distribution on the 
idealist pattern of 'communicating vessels'. The flow of goods and 
products does not find its level like the sea. Social inertia, unlike natural 
inertia, does not lead to a state of distortion, disparity and privilege. 
Growth is not democracy. Profusion is a function of discrimination. How 
could it be the corrective to it? 


The Palaeolithic, or the First Affluent Society 

We must abandon the received idea we have of an affluent society as a 
society in which all material (and cultural) needs are easily met, for that 
leaves all social logic out of account. We should rather espouse the 
notion recently propounded by Marshall Sahlins in his article on the first 
affluent society, that it is our industrial and productivist societies which, 
unlike certain primitive societies, are dominated by scarcity, by the obses- 
sion with scarcity characteristic of the market economy . 9 The more one 
produces, the more clearly does one show up, amidst plenty, how 
irremediably far off is that final point which affluence would represent, 
defined as an equilibrium between human production and human goals. 
Since what is satisfied in a growth society, and increasingly satisfied as 
productivity grows, are the very needs of the order of production, not 
the 'needs' of man (the whole system depends indeed on these being 
misrecognized), it is clear that affluence recedes indefinitely: more 
precisely, it is irrevocably rejected and the organized reign of scarcity 
(structural penury) preferred. 

For Sahlins, it was the hunter-gatherers (the primitive nomadic tribes 
of Australia, the Kalahari, etc.) who, in spite of their absolute 'poverty'. 



The social logic of consumption 


67 


knew true affluence. The primitive people of those societies have no 
personal possessions; they are not obsessed by their objects, which they 
throw away as and when they need to in order to be able to move about 
more easily. They have no apparatus of production, or 'work': they hunt 
and gather 'at their leisure', as we might say, and share everything 
within the group. They are entirely prodigal: they consume everything 
immediately, make no economic calculations and amass no stores. The 
hunter-gatherer has nothing of that bourgeois invention, economic man, 
about him. He is ignorant of the basic principles of Political Economy. 
And, indeed, he never exploits human energies, natural resources or the 
effective economic possibilities to the full. He sleeps a lot. He has a trust 
- and this is what characterizes his economic system - in the wealth of 
natural resources, whereas our system is characterized (ever more so 
with technical advance) by despair at the insufficiency of human means, 
by a radical, catastrophic anxiety which is the deep effect of the market 
economy and generalized competition. 

The collective 'improvidence' and 'prodigality' characteristic of prim- 
itive societies are the sign of real affluence. We have only the signs of 
affluence. Beneath a gigantic apparatus of production, we anxiously eye 
the signs of poverty and scarcity. But poverty consists, says Sahlins, 
neither in a small quantity of goods, nor simply in a relation between 
ends and means: it is, above all, a relation betiueen human beings. The basis 
for the confidence of primitive peoples and for the fact that, within 
hunger, they live a life of plenty, is ultimately the transparency and 
reciprocity of social relations. It is the fact that no monopolization 
whatever of nature, the soil, the instruments or products of 'labour' 
intervenes to obstruct exchange and institute scarcity. There is among 
them no accumulation, which is always the source of power. In the 
economy of the gift and symbolic exchange, a small and always finite 
quantity of goods is sufficient to create general wealth since those goods 
pass constantly from one person to the other. Wealth has its basis not in 
goods, but in the concrete exchange between persons. It is, therefore, 
unlimited since the cycle of exchange is endless, even among a limited 
number of individuals, with each moment of the exchange cycle adding 
to the value of the object exchanged. It is this concrete and relational 
dialectic which we find inverted, as a dialectic of penury and unlimited 
need, in the process of competition and differentiation characteristic of 
our civilized, industrial societies. Where, in primitive exchange, every 
relationship adds to the social wealth, in our 'differential' societies every 
social relationship adds to individual lack, since every thing possessed is 
relativized in relation to others (in primitive exchange, it is valorized by 
the very relationship with others). 

It is not, therefore, paradoxical to argue that in our 'affluent' societies 
abundance is lost and that it will not be restored by an interminable 
increase in productivity, by unleashing new productive forces. Since the 
structural definition of abundance and wealth lies in social organization. 



68 


The theory of consumption 


only a revolution of the social organization and of social relations could 
bring those things about. Will we return, one day beyond the market 
economy, to prodigality? Instead of prodigality, we have 'consumption', 
forced consumption in perpetuity, twin sister to scarcity It was social 
logic which brought primitive peoples the 'first' (and only) affluent 
society. It is our social logic which condemns us to luxurious and 
spectacular penury. 



5 

Towards a Theory of Consumption 


The Autopsy of Homo oeconomicus 

A fairy story: 'Once upon a time there was a Man who lived in Scarcity. 
After many adventures and a long journey through Economic Science, he 
met the Affluent Society. They married and had lots of needs.' 'The 
beauty of the economic man/ as A.N. Whitehead remarked, 'was that we 
knew exactly what he was after.' 1 That human fossil of the Golden Age, 
born, in the modern era, from the happy union of Human Nature and 
Human Rights, is endowed with a heightened sense of formal rationality, 
which leads him to: 

1 seek his own happiness without the slightest hesitation; 

2 prefer objects which will provide him with the greatest satisfactions. 

The whole discourse, lay and academic, on consumption is articulated 
upon this sequence, which is the mythological sequence of a folk-tale: a 
Man 'endowed' with wants or needs which 'lead' him towards objects 
which 'give' him satisfaction. Since man is, nonetheless, never satisfied 
(he is, indeed, criticized for this), the same story begins over and over 
again, with the sterile self-evidence of old fables. 

Some react with perplexity: 'Needs are the most stubbornly unknown 
of all the unknowns with which economic science deals' (Knight). But 
this doubt does not stop the litany on needs being faithfully recited by 
all the proponents of the anthropological disciplines from Marx to 
Galbraith, from Robinson Crusoe to Chombart de Lauwe. For econom- 
ists, the key term is 'utility': the desire for a specific good for purposes of 
consumption or, in other words, the destruction of its utility. Need is 
therefore already given its object [finalise] by the available goods; prefer- 
ences are orientated by the particular spread of products offered on the 
market: this is, basically, effective demand. For the psychologist, the key 
idea is 'motivation', a slightly more complex theory, less 'object-oriented' 
and more 'instinct-oriented', of a kind of pre-existent, ill-defined neces- 
sity. For sociologists and psycho-sociologists who come last in line, there 
is a 'socio-cultural' dimension here. The anthropological postulate of an 
individual endowed with needs and inclined by nature to satisfy them is 
not questioned, nor is that of the consumer as a free, conscious being 
who is presumed to know what he wants (sociologists are wary of 'deep 
motivations'), but on the basis of this idealist postulate it is accepted that 



70 


The theory of consumption 


there is a 'social dynamic' of needs. Models of competition and con- 
formity are brought in ('keeping up with the Joneses') drawn from the 
group context or from grand 'cultural models' relating to society at large 
or to history. 

Roughly speaking, three positions can be identified: for Marshall, 
needs are interdependent and rational; for Galbraith (we shall come back 
to him), choices are imposed by persuasion; for Gervasi (and others), 
needs are interdependent and are the product of a learning process 
(rather than a rational calculation). 

Gervasi: 'Choices are not made at random, but are socially controlled 
and reflect the cultural model within which they are made. It is not just 
any old goods which are produced or consumed: they must have some 
meaning with regard to a system of values.' This leads into a view of 
consumption in terms of integration: 'The goal of the economy is not the 
maximization of production for the individual, but the maximization of 
production linked in with the value system of the society' (Parsons). 
Duesenberry will claim, in this same vein, that the only choice is, in fact, 
to vary one's possessions as a function of one's position on the hierarch- 
ical ladder. Ultimately, it is the difference of choices between one society 
and another and the similarity of choices within the same society which 
force us to consider consumer behaviour as a social phenomenon. There 
is an appreciable difference between this view and that of the econom- 
ists: their 'rational' choice has here become conformist choice, the choice 
of conformity. Needs are directed not so much towards objects as 
towards values, and their satisfaction initially has the sense of sig7iing up 
to those values. The fundamental, unconscious, automatic choice of the 
consumer is to accept the style of life of a particular society (it is, 
therefore, no longer a choice(!) and the theory of the autonomy and 
sovereignty of the consumer is refuted). 

This sociology culminates in the notion of the 'standard package', 
defined by Riesman as the set of goods and services which forms more or 
less the baseline heritage of the average American. Rising regularly, 
indexed to the national standard of living, it is an ideal minimum of a 
statistical kind, a standard model of middle-class life. Exceeded by some, 
only dreamt of by others, it is an idea in which the American way of life 
is encapsulated . 2 Here again, the 'standard package' refers not so much 
to the materiality of goods (TV, bathroom, car, etc.) as to the ideal of 
conformity. 

All this sociology does not advance us very much. Apart from the fact 
that the notion of conformity has never been anything but a cover for an 
immense tautology (in this case: the average American defined by the 
'standard package', which is itself defined by the statistical average of 
goods consumed. Or, to put it sociologically, a particular individual is a 
member of a particular group because he consumes particular goods, 
and he consumes particular goods because he is a member of a particular 
group). The postulate of formal rationality we have seen at work among 



Towards a theory of consumption 


71 


economists is simply transferred here to the relation between the individ- 
ual and the group. Conformity and satisfaction are analogous: they 
involve the same matching-up of a subject to objects, or a subject to a 
group - these terms being posited as separate entities - by means of a logical 
principle of equivalence. The concepts of 'need' and 'norm' are the 
expressions in the respective cases of this miraculous match-up. 

Between the 'utility' of the economists and the 'conformity' of the 
sociologists, there is the same difference as Galbraith establishes between 
the pursuit of profit, the pecuniary motivation characteristic of the 
'traditional' capitalist system, and the behaviour of identification and 
adaptation specific to the era of organization and the technostructure. 
The basic question which results, both for the psycho-sociologists of 
conformity and for Galbraith, and which (with good reason) does not 
arise for the economists - for whom the consumer remains an individual 
ideally free in his final, rational calculation - is that of the conditioning of 
needs. 

Since Packard's The Hidden Persuaders and Dichter's The Strategy of 
Desire (not to mention a number of other works), the conditioning of 
needs (by advertising in particular) has become the favourite theme in 
the discussion of the consumer society. The celebration of affluence and 
the great lament over 'artificial' or 'alienated' needs are the two central 
strands in a single mass culture - and even in the social-scientific 
ideology on the question. This latter is generally rooted in an old moral 
and social philosophy deriving from the humanist tradition. In the case 
of Galbraith, it is based on more rigorous economic and political think- 
ing. We shall therefore concentrate here on two of his works: The Affluent 
Society and The Neiv Industrial State. 

Summarizing his position, we may say that the basic problem of 
contemporary capitalism is no longer the contradiction between 'profit 
maximization' and the 'rationalization of production' (from the point of 
view of the entrepreneur), but that between a potentially unlimited 
productivity (at the level of the technostructure) and the need to dispose 
of the product. It becomes vital for the system in this phase to control not 
just the apparatus of production, but consumer demand; to control not 
just prices, but what will be demanded at those prices. The 'general 
effect' - either prior to the act of production (surveys, market research) or 
subsequent to it (advertising, marketing, packaging) - is to 'shift the 
locus of decision in the purchase of goods from the consumer where it is 
beyond control to the firm where it is subject to control '. 3 More generally, 
'the accommodation of the market behaviour of the individual, as well as 
of social attitudes in general, to the needs of producers and the goals of 
the technostructure is an inherent feature of the system [it would be 
more appropriate to say: a logical feature]. It becomes increasingly 
important with the growth of the industrial system .' 4 This is what 
Galbraith calls the 'revised sequence', as opposed to the 'accepted 
sequence', where the initiative is supposed to lie with the consumer and 



72 


The theory of consumption 


to impact back, through the market, on the manufacturers. In this new 
case, by contrast, the manufacturers control market behaviour, and guide 
and model social attitudes and needs. This is, at least tendentially, the 
total dictatorship of the order of production. 

This 'revised sequence' destroys the fundamental myth of the 
'accepted sequence' (it has at least that critical value): namely, that it is 
the individual who exercises power in the economic system. That 
emphasis on the power of the individual contributed largely to legitimat- 
ing organization: all the dysfunctions, nuisances and inherent contra- 
dictions of the order of production are justified since they extend the 
scope of consumer sovereignty. It is clear, by contrast, that the whole 
economic and psycho-sociological apparatus of market research, motiva- 
tional studies, etc., which, it is claimed, ensures that real demand and the 
deep wants of the consumer govern the market, exists solely to stimulate 
that demand in order to create further outlets for products while 
constantly masking this objective process by staging its opposite. 'Man 
only became an object of science for man when automobiles became 
harder to sell than to manufacture.' 

So Galbraith everywhere denounces the boosting of demand by those 
'artificial accelerators' the technostructure deploys in its imperialist 
expansion, accelerators which render any stabilization of demand impos- 
sible . 5 Income, prestige purchases and surplus labour form a frantic 
vicious circle, the infernal round of consumption based on the celebra- 
tion of so-called 'psychological' needs. These are differentiated from 
'physiological' needs by apparently being based on 'discretionary 
income' and freedom of choice; they can thus be ruthlessly manipulated. 
Advertising clearly plays a crucial role here (this, too, has become a 
conventional idea). It seems attuned to the needs of the individual and to 
products. In fact, says Galbraith, it is attuned to the industrial system: 'It 
appears to place a significance on products only in so far as it is 
important for the system, and it upholds the importance and prestige of 
the technostructure from the social point of view.' Through advertis- 
ing, the system appropriates social objectives for its own gain, and 
imposes its own goals as social objectives: 'What's good for General 
Motors 

Once again, one can only agree with Galbraith (and others) that the 
freedom and sovereignty of the consumer are mystification pure and 
simple. This carefully sustained mystique (preserved first and foremost 
by economists) of individual satisfaction and choice, which is the cul- 
mination of a whole civilization of 'freedom', is the very ideology of the 
industrial system, justifying its arbitrary power and all the collective 
nuisances it generates: dirt, pollution, deculturation. In fact, the con- 
sumer is sovereign in a jungle of ugliness where freedom of choice has been 
forced upon him. The revised sequence (that is to say, the system of 
consumption) thus ideologically complements and continues the work of 



Towards a theory of consumption 


73 


the electoral system. The drugstore and the polling booth, the loci of 
individual freedom, are also the system's two mammary glands. 

We have set out at length this analysis of the 'technostructural' 
conditioning of needs and consumption because it is all-powerful today, 
because it constitutes, thematized as it is in every way in the pseudo- 
philosophy of 'alienation', a genuine collective representation which is 
itself part of consumption. But it is open to some fundamental objec- 
tions, all of which relate to its idealist anthropological postulates. For 
Galbraith, the needs of the individual can be stabilized. There is in the 
nature of Man something like an economic principle which would make 
him impose limits on his objectives and needs and, at the same time, on 
his efforts, were it not for the action of 'artificial accelerators'. In short, a 
tendency to a - not now maximal, but 'harmonious' - satisfaction, a 
satisfaction that is balanced at the individual level and which - rather 
than getting caught up in the vicious circle of excessive gratifications 
described above - should be able to articulate itself on a social organiza- 
tion of collective needs which is also harmonious. All this is completely 
utopian. 

1 On the principle of 'authentic' or 'artificial' satisfactions, Galbraith 
rails against the 'specious' reasoning of the economists: 'There is no 
proof that an expensive woman obtains the same satisfaction from yet 
another gown as does a hungry man from a hamburger. But there is no 
proof that she does not. Since it cannot be proven that she does not, her 
desire, it is held, must be accorded equal standing with that of a poor 
man for meat.' 6 'Absurd,' says Galbraith. But, it is not absurd at all (here 
the classical economists are almost right to disagree with him - but, in 
fact, they take their stand in establishing this equivalence on the terrain 
of effective demand and thus sidestep all the problems). It is nonetheless 
true that, from the point of view of the consumer's own satisfaction, 
there is no basis on which to decide what is 'factitious' and what is not. 
The enjoyment of TV or of a second home is experienced as 'true' 
freedom; no one experiences these things as an alienation. Only an 
intellectual can say such a thing, from the depths of his moralizing 
idealism, but this at most marks him out as being, for his part, an 
alienated moralist. 

2 On the 'economic principle', Galbraith says: 'What is called eco- 
nomic development consists in no small part in devising strategies to 
overcome the tendency of men to place limits on their objectives as 
regards income and thus on their efforts.' 7 And he cites the example of 
Filipino workers in California: 'The pressure of debt, and the pressure on 
each to emulate the most extravagant, quickly converted these happy 
and easygoing people into a modern and reliable work force.' 8 And all 
the underdeveloped countries, where the appearance of Western gadgets 
is the most reliable spur to economic growth. This theory, which we 
might term the theory of 'pressurizing' or economic training in con- 
sumption, linked to pressurized economic growth, is seductive. It shows 



74 


The theory of consumption 


up forced acculturation to the processes of consumption as the logical 
next stage in the development of the industrial system, following on from 
the nineteenth century when workers were trained in the processes of 
industrial production (timekeeping, disciplined action). 9 Having said 
this, we would have to explain why consumers 'take' the bait, why they 
are vulnerable to this strategy. It is too easy to appeal to a 'happy and 
easygoing' nature and to impute a mechanical responsibility to the 
system. There is no more a 'natural' tendency to be easygoing than there 
is to pressurized working. What Galbraith does not see - and this forces 
him to present individuals as mere passive victims of the system - is the 
whole social logic of differentiation, the distinguishing processes of class 
or caste which are fundamental to the social structure and are given 
free rein in 'democratic' society. In short, there is a whole sociological 
dimension of difference, status, etc., lacking here, in consequence of 
which all needs are reorganized around an objective social demand for 
signs and differences, a dimension no longer grounding consumption as 
a function of 'harmonious' individual satisfaction (which might thus be 
limited in terms of the ideal norms of 'nature'), but as an unlimited social 
activity. We shall come back to this point later. 

3 'Needs are in reality the fruits of production/ says Galbraith, not 
realizing just how right he is. For, beneath its demystified, lucid air, 
this thesis, as he understands it, is merely a more subtle version of 
the natural 'authenticity' of certain needs, and bewitchment by the 
'artificial'. Galbraith means that, without the productivist system, a great 
number of needs would not exist. He means that by producing particular 
goods and services, companies at the same time produce all the means of 
suggestion tailored to gaining acceptance for them and therefore, ulti- 
mately, 'produce' the needs which correspond to them. There is a serious 
psychological lacuna in this conception. Needs are closely specified in 
advance here in relation to finite objects. The need is simply a need for a 
particular object, and the consumer's psyche is, ultimately, just a shop- 
window or a catalogue. It is true also that, taking this simplistic view of 
human beings, one cannot but arrive at a crushing psychological reduc- 
tion in which empirical needs are mirror-reflections of empirical objects. 
Now, at this level, the conditioning thesis is false. We know how 
consumers resist particular precise injunctions, how they rove over the 
gamut of objects with which they might fulfil their 'needs', how advertis- 
ing is not all-powerful and sometimes induces opposite reactions, and 
what substitutions there can be between one object and another to meet 
the same 'need' etc. In short, at the empirical level, a whole complicated 
strategy, psychological and sociological, cuts across the strategy of 
production. 

The truth is, not that 'needs are the fruits of production', but that the 
system of needs is the product of the system of production. This is 
quite different. By system of needs, we mean that needs are not pro- 
duced one by one, in relation to the respective objects, but are produced 



Towards a theory of consumption 


75 


as consumption power, as an overall propensity within the more general 
framework of the productive forces. It is in this sense that the techno- 
structure may be said to be extending its grasp. The order of production 
does not 'capture' the order of enjoyment (strictly speaking, such an idea 
is meaningless) for its own ends. It denies the order of enjoyment and 
supplants it, while reorganizing everything into a system of productive 
forces. Over the history of the industrial system, we may trace the 
following genealogy of consumption: 

1 The order of production produces the machine /productive force, a 
technical system radically different from the traditional tool. 

2 It produces capital/rationalized productive force, a rational system of 
investment and circulation, radically different from 'wealth' and from 
earlier modes of exchange. 

3 It produces waged labour power, an abstract, systematized product- 
ive force, radically different from concrete labour and the traditional 
'workmanship'. 

4 And so it produces needs, the system of needs, demand/productive 
force as a rationalized, integrated, controlled whole, complementary 
to the three others in a process of total control of the productive forces 
and production processes. Needs as a system are also radically 
different from enjoyment and satisfaction. They are produced as 
system elements, not as a relationship of an individual to an object (just as 
labour power no longer has anything to do with - and even denies - 
the worker's relation to the product of his labour, and just as 
exchange-value no longer has anything to do with concrete, personal 
exchange, or the commodity form with real goods, etc.). 

This is what Galbraith - and with him all the 'alienists' of consumption - 
fail to see, as they persist in demonstrating that man's relation to objects, 
man's relation to himself is rigged, bamboozled, manipulated - consuming 
this myth as he consumes objects - because, accepting the timeless 
postulate of a free, conscious subject (in order to have this resurface at 
the end of history in a happy ending), they cannot but attribute all the 
dysfunctions they uncover to a diabolical power - here the techno- 
structure, armed with advertising, public relations and motivational 
research. This is magical thinking if ever there were such a thing. They 
do not see that needs, taken one by one, are nothing and that there is 
only a system of needs, or rather that needs are only the most advanced 
form of the rational systematization of the productive forces at the individual 
level, where 'consumption' takes over logically and necessarily from 
production. 

This may clear up a number of mysteries which are inexplicable to our 
pious 'alienists'. They deplore the fact, for example, that, though we are 
in the 'age of affluence', the puritan ethic has not been abandoned, that 
the old moral and self-denying Malthusianism has not been replaced by 
a modern mentality based on enjoyment. The whole of Dichter's Strategy 



76 


The theory of consumption 


of Desire is aimed at getting around and subverting these old mental 
structures 'from below'. And it is true: there has been no revolution of 
mores and the puritan ideology is still in force. In the analysis of leisure 
we shall see how it pervades all apparently hedonistic practices. We may 
assert that the puritan ethic, with all it implies in terms of sublimation, 
transcending of self and repression (in a word, in terms of morality), 
haunts consumption and needs. It is that ethic which drives it from the 
inside and gives it this compulsive, unlimited character. And the puritan 
ideology is itself reactivated by the process of consumption: this is 
indeed what makes the latter the powerful factor of integration and 
social control we know it to be. Now, all this remains paradoxical and 
inexplicable from the point of view of consumption-as-enjoyment. By 
contrast, all is clear if we accept that needs and consumption are in fact 
an organized extension of the productive forces : there is then nothing 
surprising about the fact that they should also fall under the productivist 
and puritan ethic which was the dominant morality of the industrial age. 
The generalized integration of the individual 'private' level (needs, 
feelings, aspirations, drives) as productive forces cannot but be accom- 
panied by a generalized extension at this level of the patterns of 
repression, sublimation, concentration, systematization, rationalization - 
and, of course, alienation! - which for centuries, but particularly since 
the nineteenth century, have governed the construction of the industrial 
system. 


Shifting Objects - Shifting Needs 

Until now the whole analysis of consumption has been based on the 
naive anthropology of Homo oeconomicus, rather than Homo psycho- 
oeconotnicus. Within the ideological extension of classical political eco- 
nomy, it has been a theory of needs, objects (in the broadest sense) and 
satisfactions. Or, rather, it has not been a theory, but an immense 
tautology: 'I buy this because I need it' is equivalent to the fire which 
burns because of its phlogistic essence. We have shown elsewhere to 
what degree all this empiricist/finalist thinking (the individual taken as 
end, and his conscious representation taken as the logic of events) was of 
the same order as the magical speculation of primitive peoples (and 
ethnologists) around the notion of mana . 10 No theory of consumption is 
possible at this level: the spontaneously self-evident, like analytical 
thinking in terms of needs, will never produce anything but a consumed 
reflection of consumption. 

This rationalist mythology of needs and satisfactions is as naive and 
helpless as traditional medicine is when faced with hysterical or psycho- 
somatic symptoms. Let us explain this point: outside the field of its 
objective function, where it is irreplaceable, outside the field of its 
denotation, the object becomes substitutable in a more or less unlimited 



Towards a theory of consumption 


77 


way within the field of connotations, where it assumes sign-value. Thus 
the washing machine serves as an appliance and acts as an element of 
prestige, comfort, etc. It is strictly this latter field which is the field of 
consumption. All kinds of other objects may be substituted here for the 
washing machine as signifying element. In the logic of signs, as in that of 
symbols, objects are no longer linked in any sense to a definite function or 
need. Precisely because they are responding here to something quite 
different, which is either the social logic or the logic of desire, for which 
they function as a shifting and unconscious field of signification. 

Objects and needs are here substitutable, within reason, like the 
symptoms of hysterical or psychosomatic conversion. They obey the 
same logic of slippage, transference, limitless and apparently arbitrary 
convertibility. When an illness is organic, there is a necessary relation 
between symptom and organ (similarly, when taken as an appliance or 
tool, there is a necessary relation between the object and its function). In 
hysterical or psychosomatic conversion, the symptom is, like the sign, 
(relatively) arbitrary: there is a chain of somatic signifiers - migraine, 
bowel disorder, lumbago, throat infection, general fatigue - along which 
the symptom 'wanders', just as there is a long sequence of signs/objects 
or symbols/objects over which wander not needs (which are always 
linked to the rational finality of the object), but desire and a further 
determination which is that of the unconscious social logic. 

If we pin the need down to a particular spot, if, that is, we satisfy it by 
taking it literally, by taking it as it presents itself, as the need for a 
particular object, then we make the same mistake as we would in 
applying a traditional remedy to the organ where the symptom is 
located. As soon as it is cured at this one point, it will resurface at 
another. 

The world of objects and needs might thus be seen as a world of 
generalized hysteria. Just as, in conversion, all the body's organs and 
functions become a gigantic paradigm for the symptom to work its way 
through, in consumption objects become a vast paradigm for another 
language to work through, for something other to speak. And we might 
say that this evanescence, this continual mobility to the point where it 
becomes impossible to define an objective specificity of the need (just as 
it is impossible in hysteria to define an objective specificity of the illness 
for the good reason that it does not exist), this flight from one signifier to 
another is merely the superficial reality of a desire which is, for its part, 
insatiable because it is based on lack. And that it is this forever 
unquenchable desire which signifies itself locally in successive objects 
and needs. 

Sociologically - in the face of the endless, naive confusion at the 
unstoppable advance and boundless renewal of needs, which is in fact 
irreconcilable with the rationalist theory that a satisfied need creates a 
state of equilibrium and resolution of tensions - we may advance the 
hypothesis that, if one admits that need is never so much the need for a 



78 


The theory of consumption 


particular object as the 'need' for difference ( the desire for the social 
meaning), then it will be clear that there can never be any achieved 
satisfaction, or therefore any definition of need . 11 

To the shifting nature of desire must be added, then (though is there a 
metaphorical relation between the two?), the shifting nature of differ- 
ential significations. Between the two, individual, finite needs only 
assume meaning as successive foci. It is in their very substitution that 
they signify, yet simultaneously veil, the true spheres of signification - 
the spheres of lack and difference - which overflow them on all sides. 

Denial of Enjoyment 

The 'craving' for objects is 'objectless' (Riesman). Consumer behaviour, 
which is apparently focused on, and orientated towards, objects and 
enjoyment [jouissance], in fact conduces to quite other goals: that of the 
metaphorical or displaced expression of desire, that of production, 
through differential signs, of a social code of values. It is not, then, the 
individual function of interest across a corpus of objects which is 
determinant, but the immediately social function of exchange, of com- 
munication, of distribution of values across a corpus of signs. 

The truth of consumption is that it is not a function of enjoyment, but 
a function of production and, hence, like all material production, not an 
individual function, but an immediately and totally collective one. With- 
out overturning the traditional conception in this way, no theoretical 
analysis is possible: whatever approach one takes, one falls back into the 
phenomenology of enjoyment. 

Consumption is a system which secures the ordering of signs and 
the integration of the group: it is therefore both a morality (a system 
of ideological values) and a communication system, a structure of 
exchange. It is on this basis, and on the fact that this social function and 
structural organization far surpass individuals and impose themselves 
upon them by way of an unconscious social constraint, that we can 
found a theoretical hypothesis that is neither a mere reciting of figures 
nor a descriptive metaphysics. 

According to this hypothesis, paradoxical as it may seem, consump- 
tion is defined as exclusive of enjoyment. As social logic, the consumption 
system establishes itself on the basis of a denial of enjoyment. Enjoyment 
no longer appears there at all as finality, as rational end, but as the 
individual rationalization of a process whose ends lie elsewhere. Enjoy- 
ment would define consumption for oneself, as something autonomous 
and final. But consumption is never that. Enjoyment is enjoyment for 
one's own benefit, but consuming is something one never does alone 
(this is the illusion of the consumer, meticulously sustained by the whole 
of the ideological discourse on consumption). One enters, rather, into a 
generalized system of exchange and production of coded values where, 
in spite of themselves, all consumers are involved with all others. 



Towards a theory of consumption 


79 


In this sense, consumption is an order of significations, like language, or 
like the kinship system in primitive society. 

A Structural Analysis? 

Let us recall here the Levi-Straussian principle: what confers on con- 
sumption its character of being a social fact is not what it apparently 
preserves of nature (satisfaction, enjoyment/pleasure), but the essential 
procedure by which it breaks with nature (what defines it as a code, an 
institution, a system of organization). Just as the kinship system is in the 
last instance based not on consanguinity and filiation, on a natural 
datum, but on an arbitrary classification arrangement, so the system of 
consumption is in the last instance based not on need and enjoyment but 
on a code of signs (signs/objects) and differences. 

Marriage rules are so many ways of providing for the circulation of 
women within the social group or, in other words, so many ways of 
replacing a system of consanguineous relations of a biological order by a 
sociological system of alliance. Marriage rules and kinship systems may 
thus be regarded as a kind of language or, in other words, as a set of 
operations aimed at ensuring a certain type of communication between 
individuals and groups. It is the same with consumption: there, too, a 
bio-functional, bio-economic system of goods and products (the bio- 
logical level of need and subsistence) is supplanted by a sociological 
system of signs (the level of consumption proper). And the basic function 
of the regulated circulation of objects and goods is the same as it is with 
women or words: ensuring a certain type of communication. 

We shall come back to the differences between these various types of 
'language': they have to do essentially with the mode of production of 
the values exchanged and the type of division of labour attaching to 
them. Clearly, goods are something produced, which women are not, 
and they are produced in a different way from words. The fact remains 
that, at the distribution level, goods and objects - like words and (in the 
past) women - form a global, arbitrary, coherent system of signs, a 
cultural system which, for the contingent world of needs and enjoyment, 
for the natural and biological order, substitutes a social order of values 
and classification. 

This is not to say that there are no needs or no natural utility, etc. The 
point is, rather, that consumption, as a concept specific to contemporary 
society, is not to be defined at that level. For needs and the like are valid 
for all societies. What is sociologically significant for us, and which 
marks out our age as an age of consumption, is precisely the generalized 
reorganization of this primary level into a system of signs which reveals 
itself to be one of the specific modes, and perhaps the specific mode, of 
transition from nature to culture in our era. 

The circulation, purchase, sale, appropriation of differentiated goods 
and signs/objects today constitute our language, our code, the code by 



80 


The theory of consumption 


which the entire society communicates and converses. Such is the 
structure of consumption, its language [langue], by comparison with 
which individual needs and pleasures [puissances] are merely speech 
effects. 


The Fun System or Enforced Enjoyment 

One of the strongest proofs that the principle and finality of consumption 
is not enjoyment or pleasure is that that is now something which is 
forced upon us, something institutionalized, not as a right or a pleasure, 
but as the duty of the citizen. 

The puritan regarded himself, his own person, as a business to be 
made to prosper for the greater glory of God. His 'personal' qualities, his 
'character', which he spent his life producing, were for him a capital 
to be invested opportunely, to be managed without speculation or 
waste. Conversely, but in the same way, consumerist man [Vhomme- 
consommateur] regards enjoyment as an obligation ; he sees himself as an 
enjoyment and satisfaction business. He sees it as his duty to be happy, 
loving, adulating/adulated, charming/charmed, participative, euphoric 
and dynamic. This is the principle of maximizing existence by multi- 
plying contacts and relationships, by intense use of signs and objects, by 
systematic exploitation of all the potentialities of enjoyment. 

There is no question for the consumer, for the modern citizen, of 
evading this enforced happiness and enjoyment, which is the equivalent 
in the new ethics of the traditional imperative to labour and produce. 
Modern man spends less and less of his life in production within work 
and more and more of it in the production and continual innovation of his 
own needs and well-being. He must constantly see to it that all his 
potentialities, all his consumer capacities are mobilized. If he forgets to 
do so, he will be gently and insistently reminded that he has no right not 
to be happy. It is not, then, true that he is passive. He is engaged in - has 
to engage in - continual activity. If not, he would run the risk of being 
content with what he has and becoming asocial. 

Hence the revival of a universal curiosity (a concept to be explored 
further) in respect of cookery, culture, science, religion, sexuality, etc. 'Try 
Jesus!' runs an American slogan. You have to try everything, for con- 
sumerist man is haunted by the fear of 'missing' something, some form 
of enjoyment or other. You never know whether a particular encounter, a 
particular experience (Christmas in the Canaries, eel in whisky, the 
Prado, LSD, Japanese-style love-making) will not elicit some 'sensation'. 
It is no longer desire, or even 'taste', or a specific inclination that are at 
stake, but a generalized curiosity, driven by a vague sense of unease - it 
is the 'fun morality' or the imperative to enjoy oneself, to exploit to the 
full one's potential for thrills, pleasure or gratification. 



Towards a theory of consumption 


81 


Consumption as the Emergence and Control of New 
Productive Forces 

Consumption is, therefore, merely an apparently anomic sector, because it 
is not, according to the Durkheimian definition, governed by formal 
rules and seems open to the immoderation and individual contingency 
of needs. It is not at all, as is generally imagined (this is why economic 
'science' is, ultimately, reluctant to discuss it), a marginal sector of 
indeterminacy where the individual, elsewhere constantly constrained 
by social rules, might at last - being left to himself in the 'private' sphere 
- recover a margin of freedom and personal leeway. Consumption is an 
active, collective behaviour: it is something enforced, a morality, an 
institution. It is a whole system of values, with all that expression implies 
in terms of group integration and social control functions. 

The consumer society is also the society of learning to consume, of 
social training in consumption. That is to say, there is a new and specific 
mode of socialization related to the emergence of new productive forces 
and the monopoly restructuring of a high-productivity economic 
system. 

Credit plays a crucial role here, even if it only partially affects 
spending budgets. It is an exemplary idea because, in the guise of 
gratification, ease of access to affluence and a hedonist mentality 'freed 
from the old taboos of saving, etc.', credit is in fact a systematic socio- 
economic training in enforced saving and economic calculation for 
generations of consumers who would otherwise, in a life of subsistence, 
have escaped demand planning and would not have been exploitable as 
consumption power. Credit is a disciplinary process of the extortion of 
savings and the regulation of demand, just as wage labour was a rational 
process of extortion of labour power and increases in productivity. The 
example quoted by Galbraith of the Puerto Ricans who have been turned 
from the passive, easygoing people they once were into a modern labour 
force by being motivated to consume is striking evidence of the tactical 
value of regulated, enforced, instructed, stimulated consumption with- 
in the modern socio-economic order. And this is achieved, as Marc 
Alexandre shows in his article 'La societe de consommation', by the 
mental training of the masses through credit (with the discipline and 
budgetary constraints it imposes) in economic foresight, investment and 
'basic' capitalist behaviour . 12 The rational and disciplinary ethics which 
was, according to Weber, at the origins of modern productivist capital- 
ism, in this way invests a whole area which had previously eluded it. 

It is difficult to grasp the extent to which the current training in 
systematic, organized consumption is the equivalent and extension, in the 
tiventieth century, of the great nineteenth-century-long process of the training of 
rural populations for industrial work. The same process of rationalization of 
productive forces which took place in the nineteenth century in the 
sector of production reaches its culmination in the twentieth in that of 



82 


The theory of consumption 


consumption. The industrial system, having socialized the masses as 
labour power, had much further to go to complete its own project 
[s' accomplir] and socialize them (that is, control them) as consumption 
power. The small savers or anarchic consumers of the pre-war age, who 
were free to consume or not, no longer have any place in this system. 

The whole ideology of consumption is there to persuade us that we 
have entered a new era and that a decisive human 'Revolution' separates 
the painful, heroic Age of Production from the euphoric Age of Con- 
sumption, where justice is at last done to Man and his desires. Nothing 
could be further from the truth. Production and consumption are part of 
one and the same process of expanded reproduction of the productive forces and 
their control. This imperative, which is that of the system, passes into 
daily mentalities, ethics and ideology - and here is the great trick - in its 
inverted form: in the form of the liberation of needs, individual self- 
fulfilment, enjoyment and affluence, etc. The themes of Spending, Enjoy- 
ment and Non-Calculation ('Buy now, pay later') have taken over from 
the 'puritan' themes of Saving, Work, and Heritage. But this is merely the 
semblance of a Human Revolution: in fact, it is an internal substitution, 
within the framework of a general process and a system which remain in 
all essentials unchanged, of a new system of values for an old one which 
has become (relatively) ineffective. What could become a new finality has 
become, when emptied of its real content, an enforced mediation of the 
reproduction of the system. 

The needs and satisfactions of consumers are productive forces that 
have now been constrained and rationalized like the others (labour 
power, etc.). From all the angles we have (as yet barely) explored, 
consumption has thus appeared to us, by contrast with the ideology 
through which we experience it, as a dimension of constraint: 

1 it is dominated by the constraint of signification at the level of struc- 
tural analysis; 

2 and by the constraint of production and of the production cycle in the 
strategic (socio-economico-political) analysis. 

Affluence and consumption are not, then, achieved Utopia. They are a 
new objective situation, governed by the same basic processes, but 
overdetermined by a new morality - the whole corresponding to a nezv 
sphere of productive forces in process of controlled integration into the 
same expanded system. In this sense, there is no objective 'Progress' (nor, 
a fortiori, has there been any 'Revolution'): we have here quite simply the 
same thing and something else. This results in the fact, which is indeed 
perceptible in everyday life, of the total ambiguity of Affluence and 
Consumption: they are always lived as myth (the assumption of happi- 
ness beyond history and morality) and endured as an objective process of 
adaptation to a new type of collective behaviour. 

On consumption as a civic constraint, Eisenhower stated in 1958: 'In a 
free society, government best encourages economic growth when it 



Toivards a theory of consumption 


83 


encourages the efforts of individuals and private groups. The government 
will never spend money as profitably as an individual tax-payer would 
have were he freed from the burden of taxation.' It is as though 
consumption, while not being a direct impost, might effectively succeed 
taxation as a social levy. 'With nine million dollars of tax cuts,' adds Time 
magazine, 'consumers went to two million retail stores in search of 
prosperity . . . They realized that they could increase economic growth by 
replacing their fans with air-conditioners. They secured the boom of 1954 
by purchasing five million miniaturized television sets, a million and a 
half electric carving knives etc.' In short, they performed their civic duty. 
'Thrift is un-American,' said Whyte. 

On needs as productive forces - the equivalent of the 'reserves of 
labour' of the heroic age - take this advertisement for cinema advertis- 
ing: 'Thanks to its giant screens, cinema enables you to present your 
product in situ: colours, shapes, packaging. The 2,500 cinemas in our 
advertising network have a weekly audience of three and a half million. 
67% of that audience are between 15 and 35. They are consumers at the 
height of their needs who want, and are able, to buy.' They are, precisely, 
people at the height of their (labour) powers. 


The Logistical Function of the Individual 

'The individual serves the industrial system not by supplying it with 
savings and the resulting capital; he serves it by consuming its products. 
On no other matter, religious, political, or moral, is he so elaborately and 
skilfully and expensively instructed,' writes Galbraith. 13 

The system needs people as workers (wage labour), as savers (taxes, 
loans, etc.), but increasingly it needs them as consumers. The productivity 
of labour is increasingly a matter for technology and organization and 
investment is increasingly left to companies themselves (cf. Paul Fabra, 
'Les superbenefices et la monopolisation de l'epargne par les grandes 
entreprises', Le Monde, 26 June 1969). Where the individual as such is 
required and is practically irreplaceable today is as a consumer. We may 
therefore predict that the heyday of the system of individualist values is 
just around the corner, that system whose centre of gravity is currently 
shifting from the individual entrepreneur and saver, those figureheads of 
competitive capitalism, to the individual consumer, broadening out at 
the same time to the totality of individuals - keeping step in this regard 
with the extension of the techno-bureaucratic structures. 

During the competitive stage, capitalism sustained itself after a fashion 
with a hybrid system of individualistic and altruistic values. The fiction 
of an altruistic social morality (inherited from the whole of traditional 
spirituality) was there to smooth over the antagonism of social relations. 
The 'moral law' was the product of individual antagonisms, just as the 
'law of the market' was that of competitive processes: it preserved the 



84 


The theory of consumption 


fiction of an equilibrium. Individual salvation for the community of all 
Christians, and individual rights limited only by the rights of others, 
were long-held beliefs. They are impossible today. Just as the 'free 
market' has virtually disappeared, to be replaced by bureaucratic, state 
monopoly control, so altruistic ideology is no longer sufficient to restore 
a minimum of social integration. No other collective ideology has arisen 
to take over from these values. Only the state's collective constraint is 
there to halt the exacerbation of individualisms. Hence the deep contra- 
diction between political and civil society in the 'consumer society': the 
system is forced to produce more and more consumer individualism, 
which it is at the same time forced to repress ever more harshly. This can 
only be resolved by an added dose of altruistic ideology (itself bureau- 
cratized: 'social lubrication' by solicitude, redistribution, gifts, hand-outs, 
wholesale propaganda for charitableness and human relations ). 14 Since 
this dose of altruistic ideology itself forms part of the system of con- 
sumption, it is not capable on its own of helping it attain equilibrium. 

Consumption is, therefore, a powerful element of social control (by the 
atomization of consuming individuals), but by that very fact it brings 
with it a need for ever greater bureaucratic constraint on the processes of 
consumption - which will as a consequence be exalted more and more 
energetically as the realm of freedom. There is no escaping from this 
circle. 

The automobile and traffic provide the classic example of all these 
contradictions: unlimited promotion of individual consumption sits 
alongside desperate calls for collective responsibility and social morality 
and increasingly severe constraints. The paradox is as follows: one 
cannot both repeat to the individual that 'the level of consumption is the 
just measure of social merit' and demand of him another kind of social 
responsibility since, in his individual consumption efforts, he is already 
taking on that social responsibility fully. Once again, consumption is 
social labour. The consumer is required and mobilized as zoorker at this 
level too (perhaps as much today as he is at the level of 'production'). 
One should not, then, ask the 'consumption worker' to sacrifice his 
wages (his individual satisfactions) for the good of the collectivity. 
Somewhere in their social subconscious, the millions of consumers have 
a kind of practical intuition of this new status as alienated worker. They 
spontaneously interpret the call for public solidarity as mystification, 
and their tenacious resistance on this level is merely a reflex of political 
defence. The 'fanatical egoism' of the consumer is also the subconscious 
rough sense of being, in spite of all the emotional rhetoric on affluence 
and well-being, the new exploited subject of modern times. The fact that 
this resistance and this 'egoism' lead the system into irresolvable contra- 
dictions to which it responds only by reinforced constraints merely 
confirms that consumption is a gigantic political field, the analysis of 
which - after that of production and alongside it - remains to be carried 
out. 



Towards a theory of consumption 


85 


The whole discourse on consumption aims to make the consumer 
Universal Man, to make him the general, ideal and definitive embodi- 
ment of the Human Race and to turn consumption into the beginnings of 
a 'human liberation' that is to be achieved instead of, and in spite of, the 
failure of political and social liberation. But the consumer has nothing of 
a universal being about him: he is himself a political and social being, a 
productive force and, as such, he breathes new life into some basic 
historical problems: of ownership of the means of consumption (not the 
means of production), of economic responsibility (responsibility for the 
content of production), etc. There is here a potential for deep crises and 
new contradictions. 


The Ego consumans 

Nowhere - or hardly anywhere - up to now have these contradictions 
surfaced consciously, apart from a few strikes by American housewives 
and the sporadic destruction of consumer goods (May 1968 and the 'No 
bra day', when American women publicly burned their bras). And it has 
to be said that everything is stacked against this happening. 'What does 
the consumer represent in the modern world? Nothing. What could he 
be? Everything, or almost everything. Because he remains alone next to 
millions of other solitary individuals, he is at the mercy of every vested 
interest' (Le Cooperateur, 1965). And it must be said that individualist 
interest plays a large part in this (even though we have seen that there 
are contradictions latent within it). Because it affects a collective sector, 
the sector of social labour, exploitation by dispossession (of labour power) 
reveals itself generative of solidarity (beyond a certain threshold). It 
leads to a (relative) class consciousness. The managed possession of 
consumer goods and objects is individualizing, atomizing and de- 
historicizing. As a producer, by the very fact of the division of labour, the 
worker presupposes others: exploitation is the exploitation of all. As a 
consumer, man becomes solitary again, or cellular - at best, he becomes 
gregarious (watching TV with the family, part of the crowd at the stadium 
or the cinema, etc.). The structures of consumption are both very fluid 
and closed. Can one imagine car drivers organizing against road tax? Or 
collective action being mounted against television? Every one of millions 
of TV viewers may be opposed to advertising, but it will still be 
broadcast. The fact is that consumption is orchestrated initially as a 
speaking to oneself [un discours a soi-meme], and it tends to play itself out, 
with its satisfactions and disappointments, in this minimal exchange. 
The consumer object isolates. The private sphere has no concrete neg- 
ativity because it is enfolded in on its objects, which have none. It is 
structured from the outside by the system of production whose strategy 
(no longer ideological at this level, but always political) . . . whose 
strategy of desire invests in this instance the materiality of our existence. 



86 


The theory of consumption 


its monotony and its distractions. Or, alternatively, as we have seen, the 
consumer object produces distinction(s), produces status stratification. If, 
in this case, it no longer isolates, it differentiates. It collectively assigns 
consumers to a code, without, however, arousing any collective solidarity 
(in fact, it does the opposite). 

Overall, then, consumers as such are lacking in consciousness and 
unorganized, as was often the case with workers in the early nineteenth 
century. It is as such that they are everywhere celebrated, praised, 
hymned by 'right-thinking' writers as 'Public Opinion', that mystical, 
providential, sovereign reality. Just as 'the People' is glorified by 
Democracy provided that it remains the people (and does not intervene 
on the political and social stage), so consumers are recognized as 
enjoying sovereignty (Katona speaks of the 'powerful consumer') so long 
as they do not attempt to exercise it on the social stage. The People are 
the workers, provided they are unorganized. The Public and Public 
Opinion are the consumers, provided they content themselves with 
consuming. 



6 


Personalization or the Smallest 
Marginal Difference 


To Be or Not to Be Myself 

There is no woman, however demanding, who cannot satisfy the tastes and 
desires of her personality with a Mercedes-Benz! From the hue of the leather, the 
trim and the colour of the bodywork to the hubcaps and the thousand and one 
comforts offered by the fittings, standard or optional. As for men, though mainly 
concerned with the technical qualities and performance of a car, they will 
willingly fulfil their wives' desires, since they will be equally proud to be 
complimented on their good taste. You can choose your Mercedes-Benz from 
76 different colour styles and 697 selections of interior decor. 

To have found your personality, to be able to assert it, is to discover the 
pleasure of being truly yourself. It often takes very little to achieve this. After a 
great deal of searching, I realized that a little light tint in my hair was enough 
to create perfect harmony with my complexion and my eyes. I found this 
blonde tone in the Recital range of rinses . . . And this Recital blonde, which is 
so natural, has not changed me. I am more than ever myself. 

These two pieces (there are so many one could have chosen) were taken 
from Le Monde and a minor women's weekly respectively. The prestige 
and social status evoked within them are worlds apart: between the 
magnificent Mercedes 300 SL and the Tittle light tint' of the Recital 
shampoo there is an enormous social gulf, and the women represented 
in the two pieces doubtless never meet (except perhaps at the Club 
Mediterranee - who knows?). They are at opposite ends of the social 
scale, but united by the same constraint of differentiation, personalization. 
The one is 'A', the other 'non-A', but the pattern of 'personal' value is the 
same for both, and for all of us beating a path through the 'personalized' 
jungle of 'optional' merchandise, desperately seeking the foundation 
cream that will reveal the naturalness of our face, the little touch that will 
show up our deep individual bent, the difference which will make us 
ourselves. 

All the contradictions involved in this theme, which is basic to 
consumption, can be felt in the desperate gymnastics performed by the 
language in which it is expressed, in the constant attempt to achieve an 
impossible, magical synthesis. If you are someone, can you 'find' your 
personality? And where are you while this personality is haunting you? If 
you are yourself, do you have to be so 'truly'? There again, if you have a 
false 'self' for a double, is a little light tint sufficient to restore the 



88 


The theory of consumption 


miraculous unity of one's being? What does this 'so' natural blonde 
mean? Is it natural or isn't it? And if I am myself, how can I be so 'more 
than ever'? Wasn't I entirely myself yesterday? Can I raise myself to the 
second power? Can I represent an added value to myself, appreciating as 
a company's assets appreciate? One could find thousands of examples of 
this illogicality, of this internal contradiction eating away at all that 
relates to the personality today. 'But,' as Riesman writes, 'the product noiv 
in demand is neither a staple nor a machine; it is a personality.’ The high point 
of this magical litany of personalization is achieved with the following 
injunction: 

Personalize your own home yourself! 

This 'over-reflexive' expression (personalizing oneself ... in person etc.!) 
tells the real story. What all this rhetoric says, while floundering about 
unable to say it, is precisely that there is no one there - no person. The 
'person' as absolute value, with its indestructible features and specific 
force, forged by the whole of the Western tradition as the organizing 
myth of the Subject - the person with its passions, its will, its character 
(or banality) - is absent, dead, swept out of our functional universe. And 
it is this absent person, this lost instance which is going to 'personalize' 
itself. It is this lost being which is going to reconstitute itself in abstracto, 
by force of signs, in the expanded range of differences, in the Mercedes, 
in the little light tint, in a thousand other signs, incorporated and arrayed 
to re-create a synthetic individuality and, at bottom, to shine forth in the 
most total anonymity, since difference is by definition that which has no 
name. 

The Industrial Production of Differences 

Advertising as a whole has no meaning. It merely conveys significations. 
Its significations (and the behaviours they call forth) are never personal: 
they are all differential; they are all marginal and combinatorial. In other 
words, they are of the order of the industrial production of differences - and 
this might, I believe, serve as the most cogent definition of the system of 
consumption. 

The real differences which characterized persons made them contra- 
dictory beings. Differences of the 'personalizing' type no longer set 
individuals one against another; these differences are all arrayed hier- 
archically on an indefinite scale and converge in models, on the basis of 
which they are subtly produced and reproduced. As a result, to differ- 
entiate oneself is precisely to affiliate to a model, to label oneself by 
reference to an abstract model, to a combinatorial pattern of fashion, and 
therefore to relinquish any real difference, any singularity, since these can 
only arise in concrete, conflictual relations with others and the world. 
This is the miracle and the tragedy of differentiation. In this way, 
the whole process of consumption is governed by the production of 



Personalization 


89 


artificially diversified models (like brands of soap powder), where the 
trend to monopoly is the same as in the other sectors of production. 
There is monopoly concentration of the production of differences. 

This is an absurd formula: monopoly and difference are logically 
incompatible. If they can be combined, it is precisely because the 
differences are not differences and, instead of marking a person out as 
someone singular, they mark rather his conformity with a code, his 
integration into a sliding scale of values. 

There is in 'personalization' something similar to that 'naturalization' 
effect we constantly meet in the environment - the effect which consists 
in restoring nature as sign after it has been eliminated in reality. Thus, for 
example, a forest is cut down to build a group of buildings, which are 
then given the name 'Park Estate' and a few trees are planted to create a 
'natural' feel. The 'naturalness' which haunts the whole of advertising is, 
similarly, a 'cosmetic' effect: 'Use Ultra-Beauty cosmetics for the smooth, 
even, lasting look in which your complexion has that natural bloom you 
dream of!' . . . 'I'm certain my wife doesn't use make-up!' . . . 'This veil of 
make-up, invisible and yet present.' Similarly, the 'functionalization' of 
an object is a coherent abstraction which superimposes itself upon - and 
everywhere substitutes for - its objective function ('functionality' is not 
use-value, it is sign-value). 

The logic of personalization is the same: it is contemporaneous with 
naturalization, functionalization, culturalization, etc. The general process 
can be defined historically: it is industrial monopoly concentration 
which, abolishing the real differences between human beings, homo- 
genizing persons and products, simultaneously ushers in the reign of 
differentiation. Things are much the same here as with religious or social 
movements: it is upon the ebbing of their original impulse that churches 
or institutions are built. Here, too, it is upon the loss of differences that the 
cult of difference is founded . 1 

Modern monopoly production is never just the production of goods; it 
is always also the (monopoly) production of relations, and of differences. 
Thus, a deep logical collusion links the mega-corporation and the micro- 
consumer, the monopoly structure of production and the 'individualistic' 
structure of consumption, since the 'consumed' difference in which the 
individual revels is also one of the key sectors of generalized production. 
At the same time, under the sign of monopoly, there is very great 
homogeneity today between the various contents of production/ 
consumption: goods, products, services, relations and differences. All 
these things, once distinct, are now produced in the same way, and are 
thus equally fated to be consumed. 

There is also in the combinatorial personality an echo of the combinat- 
orial culture we spoke of above. Just as that consisted in a collective 
realignment, through the mass media, to the lowest common culture 
(LCC), so personalization consists in a daily realignment to the smallest 



90 


The theory of consumption 


marginal difference (SMD): seeking out the little qualitative differences 
by which style and status are indicated. For example, smoke a Kent: 

The actor smokes one before going on stage, the rally driver before clipping on 
his helmet, the painter before signing his canvas, the young boss before saying 
'no' to his main shareholder!!] . . . The moment it ceases to smoulder in the 
ashtray, the action is on - precise, calculated, unstoppable. 

Or smoke a Marlboro, like the journalist 'with two million readers 
awaiting his editorial'. You have a classy girl and an Alfa-Romeo 2600 
Sprint? Just add 'Green Water' cologne and the trinity is complete: your 
status as a true aristocrat of the post-industrial age is secure. Or put the 
same earthenware tiles in your kitchen as Francoise Hardy or the same 
built-in gas hob as Brigitte Bardot. Or use a toaster which makes you 
initialled toast, or put charcoal 'aux herbes de Provence’ in your barbecue. 
Of course, the 'marginal' differences themselves are part of a subtle 
hierarchy. From the highly select bank, with its Louis XVI-style safes 
reserved for 800 choice clients (Americans who must keep at least 25,000 
dollars in their current accounts) to the managing director's desk which 
is antique or Premier Empire (for senior managers, opulent functional 
suffices), from the arrogant prestige of nouveau riche villas to the non- 
chalance of high-class clothing, all these marginal differences mark out 
the most rigorous social discrimination, in accordance with a general law 
of the distribution of distinctive matter (and against that law - even more 
than against the criminal law - ignorance is no defence). Not everything 
is permitted, and violations of this code of differences, which, though it 
is a shifting one, is no less a ritual for all that, are punished. As can be 
seen in the amusing story of the commercial traveller who bought the 
same Mercedes as his boss and was fired. He appealed against his 
dismissal and was granted compensation by a tribunal, but the employer 
did not take him back. All men are equal before objects as use-value, but 
they are by no means equal before objects as signs and differences, which 
are profoundly hierarchical. 

Metaconsumption 

It is important to grasp that this personalization, this pursuit of status 
and social standing, are all based on signs. That is to say, they are based 
not on objects or goods as such, but on differences. Only in this way can 
we understand the paradox of 'underconsumption' or 'inconspicuous 
consumption', i.e. the paradox of prestigious super-differentiation, which 
is no longer displayed in ostentation (Veblen's 'conspicuous consump- 
tion'), but in discretion, sobriety and self-effacement. These latter merely 
represent a further degree of luxury, an added element of ostentation 
which goes over into its opposite and, hence, a more subtle difference. 
Differentiation may then take the form of the rejection of objects, the 
rejection of 'consumption', and yet this still remains the very ultimate in 
consumption. 



Personalization 


91 


If you're wealthy and middle-class, don't go to the Quatre-Saisons. Leave the 
Quatre-Saisons to the young couples panicking over the funds they haven't 
got, the students, the secretaries, the salesgirls, the workers sick of living in 
squalor . . . Leave it to all those who want nice furniture because ugliness is 
wearisome, but want simple furniture too because they hate pretentious 
flats. 

Who is going to answer this perverse invitation? Some wealthy middle- 
class individual, perhaps, or some intellectual anxious to seem a man of 
the people. At the level of signs, there is no absolute wealth or poverty, 
nor any opposition between the signs of wealth and the signs of poverty: 
they are merely sharps and flats on the keyboard of differences. 'Ladies, 
come to X for the most windswept look you can find!' . . . 'This simple 
dress leaves not a hint of haute couture.' 

There is also a full-blown syndrome of anti-consumption, a very 
'modern' phenomenon which is, at bottom, a metaconsumption and acts as 
a cultural indicator of class. The middle classes tend rather towards 
conspicuous consumption. They are, in this regard, heirs to the great 
capitalist dinosaurs of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This 
is where they are culturally naive. Needless to say, there is a whole class 
strategy behind this: 

One of the few restrictions on the consumption of the mobile person is the 
resistance of the upper class to the arrivistes by exercise of the strategy of 
conspicuous underconsumption; in this way the already arrived attempt to 
impose their own limits on those who would become their peers . 2 

This phenomenon, in its many and varied forms, is a crucial one for the 
interpretation of our society, since one might be taken in by this formal 
reversal of signs and mistake what is merely a change in the form of the 
distance between classes as an effect of democratization. It is on the basis 
of luxury that the lost simplicity is consumed. And this same effect is met 
at all levels: it is on the basis of the bourgeois condition that intellectual 
'slumming' and 'proletarianism' are consumed, just as, in another 
sphere, it is on the basis of a lost heroic past that contemporary 
Americans go on package tours to prospect for gold in the rivers of the 
West: this 'exorcism' of opposite effects, of lost realities, of contradictory 
terms is everywhere the sign of an effect of consumption and over- 
consumption which, in every case, fits into a logic of distinction. 

It is crucial to grasp this social logic of differentiation as fundamental 
to the analysis and to see that the exploitation of objects as differential, as 
signs - the level which alone specifically defines consumption - is 
precisely established upon the relegation of their use-value (and the 
'needs' attaching to it). 

Preferences in the consumption field are not viewed as a development of the 
human ability to relate oneself discriminatingly to cultural objects. For the 
objects are hardly given meaning in private and personal values when they are 
so heavily used as counters in a preferential method of relating oneself to 
others. The cultural objects, whatever their nature, are mementos that some- 
how remain unhumanized by the force of a genuinely fetishistic attachment . 3 



92 


The theory of consumption 


This factor (the priority of differential value), which Riesman applies to 
'cultural' objects (though there is in this regard no difference between 
'cultural objects' and 'material objects'), can be seen illustrated in an 
almost experimental way by the example of a mining town in the Quebec 
taiga, where, as the reporter tells us, in spite of the proximity of the forest 
and the almost total uselessness of a car, every family nonetheless has its 
automobile outside its door: 

This vehicle, washed and polished, and occasionally taken out for a run of a 
few miles on the local bypass (there are no other roads) is a symbol of the 
American standard of living, the sign that one belongs to mechanical 
civilization. 

(and the author compares these magnificent limousines with a totally 
useless bicycle found in the Senegalese bush outside the house of a black 
former NCO who had returned to live in his village). Even more 
strikingly, the same demonstrative, ostentatious reflex leads well-off 
executives to have summer cottages built in a 10-mile radius around the 
town. In this spacious, airy town, with its salubrious climate and open to 
nature on all sides, what could be more useless than a 'place in the 
country'! What we see at work here, then, is prestigious differentiation in 
the pure state, and we see to what extent the 'objective' reasons for 
owning an automobile or a second home merely provide a cover for a 
more fundamental determination. 

Distinction or Conformism? 

The logic of differentiation is not generally made a principle of analysis 
by traditional sociology. That sociology identifies a 'need of the individ- 
ual to differentiate himself' as one more element in the repertoire of 
individual needs, which it sees as alternating with the opposite need to 
conform. The two coexist happily at the psycho-sociological descriptive 
level, in the most total illogicality and absence of theory - a state of 
affairs dubbed 'dialectic of equality and distinction' or 'dialectic of 
conformism and originality', etc. This is to confuse everything. It has to 
be recognized that consumption is not ordered around an individual 
with his personal needs, which are then subsequently indexed, according 
to demands of prestige or conformity, to a group context. There is, first, a 
structural logic of differentiation, which produces individuals as person- 
alized, that is to say, as different one from another, but in terms of general 
models and a code, to which, in the very act of particularizing them- 
selves, they conform. The singularity/ conformism schema, regarded in 
terms of the individual, is not essential: it is merely the level of life- 
experience. The basic logic is that of differentiation/personalization, viezved 
in terms of the code. In other words, conformity is not status equalization, 
the conscious homogenization of the group (each individual aligning 
himself with the others), but the fact of having the same code in 
common, of sharing the same signs which make all the members of that 



Personalization 


93 


group different from a particular other group. It is the difference from 
the other group which creates the parity (rather than the conformity) of 
the members of a group. Consensus is established differentially and the 
effect of conformity is merely the result of this. This is a crucial point, 
since it entails that all sociological analysis (particularly where consump- 
tion is concerned) is to be shifted from the phenomenal study of prestige, 
'imitation' and the superficial field of the conscious social dynamic 
towards the analysis of codes, structural relations, and systems of 
signs and distinctive material - that is to say, towards a theory of the 
unconscious field of social logic. 

Thus, the function of this system of differentiation goes far beyond the 
satisfaction of needs of prestige. If we accept a hypothesis we advanced 
earlier, we can see that the system never operates in terms of real 
(singular, irreducible) differences between persons. What grounds it as a 
system is precisely the fact that it eliminates the specific content, the 
(necessarily different) specificity of each human being, and substitutes the 
differential form, which can be industrialized and commercialized as a 
distinguishing sign. It eliminates all original qualities and retains only 
the schema generative of distinctions and the systematic production of 
that schema. At this level, differences are no longer exclusive: not only 
do they logically imply one another in the combinatory of fashion (in the 
same way as there is 'play' between different colours), but, in socio- 
logical terms, it is the exchange of differences which clinches group integration. 
Differences coded in this way, far from dividing individuals, become 
rather the matter of exchange. This is a fundamental point, through which 
consumption is defined: not any longer (1) as a functional practice of 
objects - possession, etc., or (2) as a mere individual or group prestige 
function, but (3) as a system of communication and exchange, as a code 
of signs continually being sent, received and reinvented - as language. 

In the past, differences of birth, blood and religion were not ex- 
changed: they were not differences of fashion, but essential distinctions. 
They were not 'consumed'. Current differences (of clothing, ideology, 
and even sex) are exchanged within a vast consortium of consumption. 
This is a socialized exchange of signs. And if everything can be ex- 
changed in this way, in the form of signs, this is not by virtue of some 
'liberalization' of mores, but because differences are systematically pro- 
duced in accordance with an order which integrates them all as identify- 
ing signs and, being substitutable one for another, there is no more 
tension or contradiction between them than there is between high and 
low or left and right. 

So, in Riesman, we see the members of the peer group socializing 
preferences, exchanging evaluations and, by their continual competition, 
ensuring the internal reciprocity and narcissistic cohesion of the group. 
They come together (Latin competere) in the group through 'competition', 
or rather through what, being filtered through the code of fashion, is no 



94 


The theory of consumption 


longer open and violent competition - such as that of the market or a 
physical struggle - but a ludic abstraction of competition. 


Code and Revolution 

It will be easier now to grasp the crucial ideological function of the 
system of consumption in the current socio-political order. That ideo- 
logical function can be deduced from the definition of consumption as 
the establishment of a generalized code of differential values and from 
the function of the system of exchange and communication which we 
have just determined. 

Modern (capitalist, productivist, post-industrial) social systems do not, 
to any great extent, base their social control, the ideological regulation of 
the economic and political contradictions by which they are riven, on the 
great egalitarian and democratic principles, on that whole system of 
ideological and cultural values that is broadcast to all corners of the earth 
and is operative everywhere. Even when seriously internalized through 
schooling and socialization, these conscious egalitarian values - of law 
and justice, etc. - remain relatively fragile, and would never be up to the 
task of integrating a society whose objective reality they too visibly 
contradict. Let us say that at this ideological level, contradictions can 
always break out again. But the system can count much more effectively 
on an unconscious mechanism of integration and regulation. And this, 
unlike equality, consists precisely in involving individuals in a system of 
differences, in a code of signs. Such is culture, such is language, such is 
'consumption' in the deepest sense of the term. What is politically 
effective is the creation not of a situation in which contradiction is 
replaced by equality and equilibrium, but of one in which contradiction 
is replaced by difference. The solution to social contradiction is not 
equalization, but differentiation. No revolution is possible at the level of 
a code - or, alternatively, revolutions take place every day at that level, 
but they are 'fashion revolutions', which are harmless and foil the other 
kind. 

Here again, the proponents of the classical analysis are wrong in their 
interpretation of the ideological role of consumption. It is not by heaping 
comfort, satisfaction and social standing on individuals that consump- 
tion is able to defuse virulent social tension (that idea is linked to the 
naive theory of needs and can only lead to the absurd hope of making 
people ever more destitute in order to have them rebel). It is, rather, by 
training them in the unconscious discipline of a code, and competitive 
cooperation at the level of that code; it is not by creating more creature 
comforts, but by getting them to play by the rules of the game. This is 
how consumption can on its own substitute for all ideologies and, in the 
long run, take over alone the role of integrating the whole of society, as 
hierarchical or religious rituals did in primitive societies. 



Personalization 


95 


The Structural Models 

'What mother has not dreamt of a washing machine specially designed 
for her alone?' asks an advert. And, indeed, what mother has not? 
Millions, then, have dreamt of the same washing machine, specially 
designed for each of them alone. 

'The body you dream of is your own.' This admirable tautology, which 
self-evidently resolves down to an argument for a particular kind of bra, 
brings together all the paradoxes of 'personalized' narcissism. It is by 
coming close to your reference ideal, by being 'truly yourself', that you 
most fully obey the collective imperative and most closely coincide with 
a particular 'imposed' model. Fiendish trick or the dialectic of mass 
culture? 

We shall see how consumer society conceives itself as, precisely, a 
society of consumption and reflects itself narcissistically in its image. 
This process spreads right down to each individual, remaining all the 
while a collective function, and this explains why it is in no way 
incompatible with conformism. Indeed, the opposite is true, as the two 
examples above well illustrate. The narcissism of the individual in 
consumer society is not an enjoyment of singularity; it is a refraction of 
collective features. However, it is always presented as narcissistic invest- 
ment of 'oneself' through smallest marginal differences (SMDs). 

The individual is everywhere invited, primarily, to enjoy himself, to 
indulge himself. The understanding is that it is by pleasing oneself that 
one is likely to please others. Ultimately, perhaps, self-indulgence and 
self-seduction may totally supplant the objective aim of seduction. The 
enterprise of seduction turns round upon itself in a kind of perfect 
'consumption', but its referent remains, nonetheless, the instance of the 
other. Put simply, pleasing has become an enterprise in which the person 
to be pleased is merely a secondary consideration. Like the repetition of 
the brand name in advertising. 

This invitation to self-indulgence is mainly directed at women. But the 
pressure is exerted on zvomen through the myth of Woman. Woman as 
collective and cultural model of self-indulgence. Lvelyne Sullerot puts 
this well: 

Woman is sold to women . . . while doing what she believes is preening 

herself, scenting herself, clothing herself, in a word 'creating' herself, she is, in 

fact, consuming herself. 

And this falls in with the logic of the system: not just one's relation- 
ship with others, but also one's relation to oneself becomes a consumed 
relation. Though this should not be confused, once again, with the fact of 
being pleasing to oneself on the strength of genuine qualities - of beauty, 
charm, taste, etc. That is something quite different; in that case, there is 
no consumption, but a spontaneous and natural relation. Consumption is 
always defined by the substitution for this spontaneous relation of a 
relation mediated by signs. If woman does, in fact, consume herself this 



96 


The theory of consumption 


is because her relation to herself is objectivized and fuelled by signs, 
signs which make up the feminine model, which constitutes the real 
object of consumption. It is that model women consume when they 
'personalize' themselves. Ultimately, women 'can reasonably trust in 
neither the sparkle of their eyes, nor the softness of their skin: those 
things, which are theirs, bring them no certainty' (Bredin, La Nef). There 
is a great difference between having self-xvorth [valoir] by dint of natural 
qualities and showing oneself off to best advantage [se faire valoir] by sub- 
scribing to a model and conforming to a ready-made code. What we 
have in this latter case is a functional femininity in which all the natural 
values of beauty, charm and sensuality give way to the exponential values 
of (artificially achieved) naturalness, eroticism, 'figure' and expressive- 
ness. 

Like violence , 4 the forms of seduction and narcissism are laid down in 
advance by models produced industrially by the mass media and com- 
posed of identifiable signs (if all girls are to think they are Brigitte Bardot, 
then they must stand out from the crowd by virtue of their hair, their 
mouths or a particular feature of clothing - that is to say, necessarily the 
same thing for all of them). Everyone finds his or her own personality in 
living up to these models. 


The Masculine and the Feminine Models 

Functional femininity has its counterpart in functional masculinity or 
virility. The models are, quite naturally, arranged in twos. They are the 
product not of the differentiated nature of the sexes, but of the differential 
logic of the system. The relation of the Masculine and the Feminine to 
real men and women is relatively arbitrary. Increasingly today, men and 
women play equally on the two registers in creating their significations, 
but, for their part, the terms of the signifying opposition only derive 
validity from their distinction. These two models are not descriptive: 
they govern consumption. 

The masculine model is the model of particularity [exigence] and 
choice. All masculine advertising stresses the rule of choice, in terms of 
rigour and inflexible attention, as a matter of 'professional ethics'. The 
modern man of quality is particular or demanding. He will countenance no 
failing and he neglects no detail. He is a 'select' individual, though he is 
not so passively or by natural grace, but by practising selectivity (the fact 
that that selectivity is orchestrated by others is a quite separate matter). 
There is no question of letting himself go or indulging himself; his aim is 
to achieve distinction. Knowing how to choose and not to let one's 
standards slip are equivalent to the military and puritan virtues: intrans- 
igence, decisiveness, valour. These virtues will be possessed by the least 
young dandy who buys his clothes from Romoli or Cardin. The mascu- 
line model is, then, a model of competitive or selective virtue. Much 



Personalization 


97 


more deeply, choice - as a sign of belonging to the elect (he who chooses, 
who knoivs hozv to choose, is chosen, is one of the elect) - is the 
counterpart in our societies to the rite of challenge and competition in 
primitive ones: it confers status. 

In the feminine model, women are, much rather, enjoined to take 
pleasure themselves. It is not, in this case, selectivity and particularity, 
but self-indulgence and narcissistic concern for one's own welfare which 
are indispensable. At bottom, men are still being invited to play soldiers, 
and women to play dolls with themselves. 

Even at the level of modern advertising, the two models - the 
masculine and the feminine - are always segregated, then, and mascu- 
line hierarchical pre-eminence still survives (it is here, in the models, that 
the fixity of the value system can be read: the hybridity of 'real' behaviour 
matters little in this regard, since the deep mentality is shaped by the 
models - and the masculine/feminine opposition, like that between 
manual and intellectual labour, has not changed). 

We have, then, to retranslate this structural opposition into the 
language of social supremacy. 

1 The masculine choice is 'agonistic': it is, by analogy with the 
challenge, the noble behaviour par excellence. It is honour which is in 
play, or Bewdhrung (proving oneself), an ascetic and aristocratic virtue. 

2 By contrast, what is perpetuated in the feminine model is the 
derived value, the vicarious value (Veblen writes of 'vicarious status' and 
'vicarious consumption'). Women are only called on to gratify them- 
selves in order the better to be able to enter as objects into the masculine 
competition (enjoying themselves in order to be the more enjoyable). 
They never enter into direct competition (except with other women over 
men). If a woman is beautiful - that is to say, if the woman is a woman - 
she will be chosen. If the man is a man, he will choose his wife among 
other objects/signs (his car, his wife, his eau de toilette). Under cover of 
self -gratification, woman (the feminine model) is consigned to the per- 
formance of proxy 'services'. She is not autonomously determined. 

This status, shown up at the narcissistic level in advertising, has quite 
other - and equally real - aspects at the level of productive activity. 
Woman, whose fate lies with the paraphernalia (household objects), 
fulfils not only an economic function, but a prestige function, deriving 
from the aristocratic or bourgeois idleness of women who, by that 
idleness, attested to the prestige of their masters: the housewife does not 
produce; she does not show up in the nation's accounts; she is not 
recorded as a productive force. She is, in fact, fated to be of value as a force 
of prestige, by her official uselessness, by her status as a 'kept' slave. She 
remains an attribute, reigning over those secondary attributes, the house- 
hold objects. 

Or, in the middle and upper classes, she devotes herself to 'cultural' 
activities. These are also unpaid, unaccounted and generally unaccount- 
able. That is to say, they are activities involving no responsibility. She 



98 


The theory of consumption 


'consumes' culture, though she does not even do this in her own right: it 
is decorative culture. Thus she is engaged in cultural promotion, which, in 
spite of all the democratic alibis, always falls in with this same require- 
ment that it be useless. Ultimately, culture is simply a sumptuary side- 
effect of 'beauty' - culture and beauty being not so much values in 
themselves, activities carried on for their own sake, as evidence of 
superfluity, an 'alienated' social function (performed by proxy). 

Once again, we are speaking here of differential models, which are not 
to be confused with real sexes, or with social categories. There is 
diffusion and contamination everywhere. Modern man (as we see every- 
where in advertising) is also called on to indulge himself. The modern 
woman is called on to choose and to compete, to be 'particular' or 
'demanding'. All this is, of course, in keeping with a society where the 
respective social, economic and sexual functions are relatively inter- 
mingled. However, the distinction between the masculine and feminine 
models remains, for its part, total (and, indeed, even the mixing of social 
and occupational tasks and roles is, in the end, a weak and marginal 
phenomenon). It is even possible that the structural and hierarch- 
ical opposition between the Masculine and the Feminine is growing 
stronger in certain respects. Thus, the appearance in advertisements (for 
Selimaille knitwear) of Publicis's handsome young male nude marked 
the extreme point of contamination. This did not, however, change the 
distinct and antagonistic models one jot. What it did bring out was the 
emergence of a 'third', hermaphroditic model, everywhere linked to 
the emergence of adolescence and youth. This is a sexually ambiguous, 
narcissistic model, but one much closer to the feminine model of self- 
indulgence than the demanding masculine one. 

Furthermore, what we are seeing very generally today is the extension 
of the feminine model to the whole field of consumption. What we have said of 
women in their relationship to prestige values, and of their 'proxy' 
status, goes, virtually and absolutely, for Homo consumans in general - 
men and women together. And it goes for all members of social cat- 
egories whose destinies lie more or less (increasingly, as the current 
political strategy has it) with 'paraphernalia', household objects and 
'proxy' pleasures. Entire classes are thus fated, in the image of Woman 
(who, as Woman/Object remains emblematic of consumption), to func- 
tion as consumers. Their promotion to the rank of consumers might thus 
be said to seal their destiny as serfs. Though, as is not the case with the 
housewife, far from sinking into oblivion, their alienated activity is today 
boosting the national economic figures. 



PART III 

MASS MEDIA, SEX AND LEISURE 


7 

Mass-Media Culture 


The 'Neo' - or Anachronistic Resurrection 

As Marx said of Napoleon III, sometimes in history the same events 
occur twice: the first time with real historical import; the second merely 
as caricatural evocation of the event, as a grotesque avatar of it - 
sustained by a legendary reference. Cultural consumption may thus be 
defined as the time and place of the caricatural resurrection, the parodic 
evocation of what already no longer exists - of what is not so much 
'consumed' as 'consummated' (completed, past and gone). The tourists 
who journey by coach to the far north to re-enact the Gold Rush, hiring 
Eskimo tunics and clubs to provide some local colour, are people who 
are consuming: they are consuming in ritual form something which was 
a historical event, and has been forcibly reactualized as legend. In 
history, this process is called restoration: it is a process of the denial of 
history and the anti-evolutionist resurrection of earlier models. Con- 
sumption, too, is thoroughly imbued with this anachronistic substance. 
In its service stations in winter, Esso offers you its log fire and barbecue 
kit. This is a characteristic example: it is the masters of petrol, the 
'historical liquidators' of log fires and their entire symbolic value, who 
serve these back up to you as the Esso neo-log-fire. What is consumed 
here is the simultaneous, combined, collusive enjoyment of the auto- 
mobile and the defunct prestige of everything whose death-knell the 
automobile sounded - these latter now resuscitated by the automobile! 
We ought not to see this as mere nostalgia: it is the historical and 
structural definition of consumption that, by way of this 'lived' level, it 
exalts signs on the basis of a denial of things and the real. 

We have already seen how, through mass communications, the 
pathetic hypocrisy of the minor news item heightens with all the signs of 
catastrophe (deaths, murders, rapes, revolution) the tranquillity of daily 
life. But this same pathetic redundancy of signs is visible everywhere: the 
glorification of the very young and the very old, the front-page treatment 
for blue-blood weddings, the mass-media hymning of the body and 
sexuality - everywhere we see the historical disintegration of certain 



100 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


structures celebrating, as it were, under the sign of consumption, both 
their real disappearance and their caricatural resurrection. The family is 
dissolving? It is glorified. Children aren't children any more? Childhood 
is turned into something sacred. The old are alone, sidelined? A col- 
lective show of sympathy for the aged. And, even more clearly, the body 
is glorified precisely as its real possibilities are atrophying and it is 
increasingly harassed by the system of urban, professional and bureau- 
cratic control and constraints. 


Cultural Recycling 

It is now one of the characteristic dimensions of our society, in so far as 
one's professional expertise, individual career path and social position 
are concerned, to engage in retraining - in what is known, in French, as 
le recyclage. It is now the case that everyone who does not wish to fall 
behind, be left on the shelf or lose their professional standing must 
'update' their knowledge, their expertise - in short, their practical range 
of skills - on the labour market. This is a notion heard particularly in 
connection with technical staff and also, more recently, with teachers. It 
claims, therefore, to be scientific and based on the continual advance of 
knowledge (in the exact sciences, sales techniques, teaching methods, 
etc.), to which all individuals should normally adapt if they are to remain 
'up to speed'. In fact, the term 'recycling' prompts a number of thoughts: 
it inevitably brings to mind the 'cycle' of fashion: in that field, too, 
everyone must be 'with-it' and must 'recycle themselves' - their clothes, 
their belongings, their cars - on a yearly, monthly or seasonal basis. If 
they do not, they are not true citizens of the consumer society. Now, it is 
clear that there is no continual progress in these fields: fashion is 
arbitrary, transient, cyclical, and adds nothing to the intrinsic qualities of 
the individual. It does, however, impose thoroughgoing constraints, and 
the sanction it wields is that of social success or banishment. We may ask 
ourselves whether the 'recycling of knowledge', under its scientific cover, 
does not conceal this same kind of accelerated, obligatory, arbitrary 
change as fashion, and does not bring into play at the level of knowledge 
and persons the same 'built-in obsolescence' as the cycle of production 
and fashion foists on material objects. In that case, we should have here 
not a rational process of the accumulation of scientific knowledge, but a 
non-rational social process of consumption, indissociable from all the 
others. 

Medical recycling: the check-up. Bodily, muscular, physiological re- 
cycling: Le President 1 for men; diets and beauty care for women; 
holidays for everyone. But we can (and must) extend this notion to much 
broader phenomena: the very 'rediscovery' of the body is a corporeal 
recycling; the 'rediscovery' of Nature, in the form of a countryside 
trimmed down to the dimensions of a mere sample, surrounded on all 



Mass-media culture 


101 


sides by the vast fabric of the city carefully policed, and served up 'at 
room temperature' as parkland, nature reserve or background scenery 
for second homes, is, in fact, a recycling of Nature. That is to say, it is no 
longer an original, specific presence at all, standing in symbolic opposi- 
tion to culture, but a simulation, a 'consomme' of the signs of nature set 
back in circulation - in short, nature recycled. If we have not yet reached 
this point everywhere, it is nonetheless the current trend. Whether we 
speak of countryside planning, conservation or environment, it is, in 
every case, a question of recycling a nature which is itself doomed. Like 
events, like knowledge. Nature is governed in this system by the principle 
of being up-to-the-minute. It has to change functionally, like fashion. It 
provides an ambience and is therefore subject to a replacement cycle. This 
is the same principle as is today invading the occupational field, where 
the values of science, technique, skill and competence are giving way to 
'recycling' - that is to say, to the irresistible pressures of mobility, status 
and the career profile. 2 

This principle of organization governs all 'mass' culture today. What 
all the acculturated receive is not culture, but cultural recycling. (Ulti- 
mately, not even the truly 'cultured' escape this, or at least they will not.) 
They get to be 'in the know', to 'know what's going on'; they get 
to update their cultural rig-out on a monthly or yearly basis. They get to 
submit to that low-intensity constraint which is perpetually shifting like 
fashion and is the absolute opposite of culture conceived as: 

1 an inherited legacy of works, thought and tradition; 

2 a continuous dimension of theoretical and critical reflection - critical 
transcendence and symbolic function. 

Both these dimensions are also denied by the cyclical subculture, made 
up of obsolescent cultural ingredients and signs, by the up-to-the-minute 
cultural scene, which runs from kinetic art to weekly encyclopaedias - 
recycled culture. 

We can see that the problem of the consumption of culture is not, 
properly speaking, linked to cultural contents. Nor is it connected with 
the 'audience for culture' (the eternal false problem of the 'vulgarization' 
of art and culture to which both the practitioners of 'aristocratic' culture 
and the champions of 'mass' culture fall prey). The decisive factor is not 
whether millions or only a few thousand partake of a particular work, 
but that that work, like the car of the year, or nature in parklands, is 
condemned to be merely an ephemeral sign because it is produced, 
deliberately or otherwise, in what is today the universal dimension of 
production: the dimension of the cycle and recycling. Culture is no 
longer made to last. It keeps up its claim to universality, of course, and to 
being an ideal reference, doing so all the more strongly for the fact that it 
is losing its semantic substance (just as Nature was never glorified quite 
so much before it was everywhere laid waste). However, in its reality, 
and by its mode of production, it is subject to the same pressure to be 



102 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


'up-to-the-minute' as material goods. And we must stress once again that 
this does not have to do with the industrial dissemination of culture. The 
fact that Van Gogh is exhibited in department stores or that Kierkegaard 
sells 200,000 copies is of no matter here. What affects the meaning of the 
works is the fact that all significations have become cyclical. In other words 
that, through the very system of communication, a particular mode of 
succession and alternation has been imposed upon them, a combinatorial 
modulation which is precisely that of hemlines and television pro- 
grammes (cf. below, 'Medium is Message'). And also the fact that, given 
this situation, culture, like the pseudo-event in 'public information', like 
the pseudo-object in advertising, can be produced (and virtually is 
produced) out of the medium itself, out of the code of reference. Here we 
find that same logical procedure we come upon in 'simulation models' 3 
or see at work in gadgets, which are merely a play on forms and technology. 
Ultimately, there is no longer any difference between 'cultural creativity' 
(in kinetic art, etc.) and this ludic/ technical play of combinations. And 
no difference between 'avant-garde creations' and 'mass culture' either. 
The latter tends to combine stereotyped themes and (ideological, folk- 
loric, sentimental, moral, historical) contents, while the former combines 
forms and modes of expression. But both play primarily on a code, and 
on a calculation of market share and amortization. Moreover, it is curious 
to see how the system of literary prizes, currently despised in the world 
of letters for its academic decrepitude (from a universal standpoint, it is, 
in fact, stupid to award a prize to one book a year), has gained a 
remarkable new lease of life from its adaptation to the functional cycle of 
modern culture. The regularity of these prizes, which in other ages was 
absurd, is now compatible with the present vogue for recycling, with the 
focus of cultural fashion on the present. In the past, these prizes marked 
out a book for posterity, and it was faintly ridiculous. Today, they mark 
out a book for topical interest, and it works. They have found their 
second wind. 


The Tirlipot and the Quiz Machine, or the Lowest Common 
Culture (LCC) 

The mechanics of the tirlipot game consist, in theory, in seeking out 
the definition of a verb by question-and-answer methods ( tirlipoter [to 
'whatsit'] is the equivalent of the 'thingamyjig', a floating signifier for 
which, by selective restitution, the specific signifier is to be substituted). 4 
It is, then, in theory, an intellectual learning process. It is evident, 
however, that, with a few rare exceptions, the contestants are incapable 
of asking real questions: they find questioning, probing or analysing a 
nuisance. They start out from the answer (a particular verb which they 
have in mind) and deduce the question from it. This is, in fact, the 
interrogative form of the dictionary definition (e.g. 'is to tirlipot to put an 



Mass-media culture 


103 


end to something?' If the compere says 'Yes, in a way' or even, simply, 
'Perhaps . . . what do you have in mind?', then the automatic reply comes 
back 'to finish' or 'complete'). What we have here is precisely the 
approach of the handyman trying one screw after another to see if they 
fit, a rudimentary exploratory method based on trial-and-error, with no 
rational investigation involved. 

With the quiz machine we find the same principle. There is no learning. 
A minicomputer asks you questions, offering a range of five replies to 
each. You choose the right answer. Time counts. If you respond instant- 
aneously, you get maximum points and are a 'champion'. This is not, 
therefore, thinking time, but reaction time. The machine does not bring 
intellectual processes into play, but merely immediate reaction mecha- 
nisms. You must not weigh up the proposed answers or deliberate: you 
have to see the right answer, register it like a stimulus on the same 
optomotor lines as the photo-electric cell. To know is to see (cf. the 
Riesmannian 'radar', which allows you to move about among other 
people, maintaining or cutting off the contact, immediately selecting 
positive and negative relationships). Most of all, there must be no 
analytical thinking: this is penalized by a lower points total due to the 
time wasted. 

If these games do not have a learning function (as is always argued by 
the programme-makers and the mass-media ideologues), what in fact is 
their function? In tirlipot, it is clearly participation: the content is of no 
importance. For the contestant, it is the pleasure of occupying the 
airwaves for 20 seconds, long enough to have one's voice heard, to 
mingle that voice with the compere's, to hold his attention by striking up 
a brief dialogue with him and, through him, to strike up magical contact 
with that warm and anonymous multitude, the public. It is clear that 
most people are not at all disappointed when they get the answer wrong. 
They have had what they wanted: communion - or, rather, that modern, 
technical, aseptic form of communion that is communication, 'contact'. 
What marks out the consumer society is not, in fact, the much deplored 
absence of ceremonies - the radio game is a ceremony just as much as the 
mass or primitive sacrifice - but the fact that ceremonial communion is 
no longer achieved by way of bread and wine, which can be seen as flesh 
and blood, but through the mass media (which are not just the messages, 
but the whole broadcasting set-up, the network, the station, the receivers 
and, of course, the programme-makers and public). In other words, 
communion is no longer achieved through a symbolic medium, but through a 
technical one : this is what makes it communication. 

What is shared, then, is no longer a 'culture', the living body, the actual 
presence of the group (everything which made up the symbolic and 
metabolic function of the ceremony and the feast), nor is it even 
knowledge in the proper sense of the term, but that strange corpus of 
signs and references, of recollections from schooldays and intellectual 
fashion signals known as 'mass culture', which we might term lowest 



104 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


common culture (LCC), the way one speaks of a lowest common 
denominator in mathematics. This is also akin to the 'standard package' 
which lays down the lowest common panoply of objects the average 
consumer must possess in order to accede to the title of citizen of this 
consumer society. The LCC lays down the lowest common panoply of 
'right answers' the average individual is supposed to possess if he is to 
win his spurs as cultural citizen. 

Mass communication excludes culture and knowledge. There is no 
question of real symbolic or didactic processes coming into play, since 
that would be to compromise the collective participation which is the 
meaning of the ceremony, a participation which can only be enacted 
through a liturgy, a formal code of signs meticulously voided of all 
meaning content. 

We can see that the term 'culture' is potentially very misleading. This 
cultural 'consomme', this 'digest' /repertoire of coded questions/ 
answers, this LCC, is to culture what life insurance is to life: it is there to 
ward off its dangers, and, on the basis of the denial of a living culture, to 
glorify the ritualized signs of culturalization. 

However, this LCC, which draws its sustenance from an automatized 
question-and-answer mechanism, has many affinities with the 'culture' 
of the schoolroom. Indeed, all these games have the archetype of the 
examination as their mainspring. And this is no accident. The examination 
is the pre-eminent form of social advancement. Everyone wants to take 
exams, even in bastardized, radiophonic form, because there is today 
something prestigious about being examined. The endless proliferation 
of these games contains within it, then, a powerful process of social 
integration: we can, ultimately, imagine a whole society integrated into 
these mass-media contests, the whole of social organization dependent 
on their sanction. There has already been one society in history which 
had a total system of selection and organization by examination: China 
under the Mandarins. But that system only affected an educated fringe. 
In this case, we should have entire masses mobilized in an endless game 
of double-or-quits, in which everyone would be securing or endangering 
his social destiny. In this way, we would be spared the archaic machinery 
of social control, the best system of integration having always been that 
of ritualized competition. We have not reached that point yet. For the 
moment, let us note the very great aspiration to be a part of the exam 
situation - a dual aspiration this, since everyone may be examined, but 
anyone can also slot into that situation as examiner, as judge (as a tiny 
fragment of that collective authority called the public). This is an oneiric 
duplication, phantasmic in the strictest sense: being both the one person 
and the other. But it is also a tactical operation of integration by 
delegation of power. What defines mass communication is, therefore, the 
combination of technical medium and LCC ( not the massive numbers of 
people taking part). The quiz machine is also a mass medium, even if the 
game seems to be an individual one. In playing this machine, where 



Mass-media culture 


105 


intellectual dexterity registers as beeps and flashing lights - an admirable 
synthesis of knowledge and the household appliance - you are still being 
programmed by a collective agency. The computerized medium is 
merely a technical materialization of the collective medium, of that 
system of 'lowest common culture' signals which governs the participa- 
tion of all in each and each in the same system. 

Let us say, once again, that it is pointless and absurd to compare High 
Culture and Mass-Media Culture and to contrast their value. The one has 
a complex syntax, the other is a combinatory of elements which can 
always be broken down into stimulus-response and question-and- 
answer patterns. The latter is most vividly illustrated in the radio game. 
But, far beyond this ritual spectacle, this pattern governs the behaviour 
of the consumer in each of his acts, in his general conduct, which is 
organized as a series of responses to different stimuli. Tastes, preferences, 
needs, decisions: where both objects and relationships are concerned, the 
consumer is perpetually appealed to, 'questioned' and required to 
respond. Making a purchase is, in this context, akin to a radio quiz. It is 
today not so much an original act on the part of the individual aimed at 
concretely satisfying a need, as, primarily, the response to a question - a 
response which engages the individual in the collective ritual of con- 
sumption. It is a game to the extent that every object is always one 
among a range of variants, between which the individual is required to 
choose - the act of purchasing is a choosing, the determination of a 
preference - precisely as he or she must choose between the answers 
offered by the quiz game. It is in this sense that the purchaser plays, 
replying to a question which is never the direct one regarding the utility 
of the object, but the indirect one regarding the 'play' among the variants 
of the object. That 'play' and the choice which marks its success- 
ful conclusion characterize the purchaser/consumer as opposed to the 
traditional user. 


Lowest Common Multiples (LCMs) 

The lowest common culture (LCC) of the radio waves or the mass- 
circulation magazines today has an artistic subsidiary. This is the multi- 
plication of artworks, for which the Bible - itself now multiplied and 
delivered to the masses in weekly instalments - provided the miraculous 
prototype in the celebrated multiplication of loaves and fishes beside the 
Sea of Galilee. 

A great democratic wind has blown through the heavenly Jerusalem of 
culture and art. 'Contemporary art', from Rauschenberg to Picasso, from 
Vasarely to Chagall and on to younger artists, is holding its 'private 
view' at the Printemps department store (though, admittedly, it is doing 
so at the top of the building and not compromising the second-floor 
'interior decoration' department with its harbour views and setting 



106 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


suns). The work of art is breaking out of the solitude in which it has for 
centuries been confined as unique object and privileged moment. Once 
upon a time, as everyone knows, galleries were sanctuaries. But the 
masses have now taken over from the solitary owner or the enlightened 
art-lover. And there is not simply industrial reproduction to delight the 
masses, but a work of art that is both unique and collective: the 
Multiple. 

In a happy initiative, under the aegis of the Prisunic department stores, 
Jacques Putman has just published a collection of original prints at a very 
affordable price (100 F). No one finds it odd any longer to acquire a lithograph 
or an etching at the same time as a pair of stockings or a garden chair. The second 
'Prisunic Suite' has just gone on show at L'Oeil gallery. It is now on sale in the 
shops. This is not a promotion, nor yet a revolution^ ]. The multiplication of 
images is a response to a multiplying public, which inevitablyj!] leads to the 
creation of places to view those images. Experimental research no longer ends 
in enslavement to power and money: the art-loving benefactor is giving way 
to the participating client . . . Each numbered and signed print is made in an 
edition of 300 copies ... A victory for the consumer society? Perhaps. But what 
matter, since quality is preserved? Those who will not understand contempor- 
ary art today are those who do not want to. 

Art speculation, which was based on rarity value, is over. With the 
'Unlimited Multiple', art moves into the industrial era (as it so happens, 
these Multiples, produced in limited editions, immediately give rise to a 
black market and 'alternative' speculation: the false ingenuousness of the 
producers and designers). The work of art in the pork butchers, the 
abstract in the factory . . . Don't say, 'What is Art?' any more; don't say, 
'Art is too dear'; don't say, 'Art isn't for me': read Les Muses. 

It would be too easy to say that a Picasso painting in a factory will 
never abolish the division of labour and that the multiplication of 
multiples, were that to be achieved, will never abolish social division and 
the transcendence of Culture. The illusion of the ideologues of the 
Multiple (let us not speak here of the conscious or subconscious 
speculators among both artists and dealers, though they are by far the 
largest group involved) and of cultural dissemination or promotion more 
generally is, nonetheless, an instructive one. Their noble effort to democ- 
ratize culture or, where the designers are concerned, 'to create beautiful 
objects for the greatest number', visibly meets with failure - or with such 
commercial success that it becomes suspect as a result, which amounts to 
the same thing. But this contradiction is merely apparent: it exists 
because these fine souls stubbornly insist on regarding Culture as a 
universal, while seeking, at the same time, to disseminate it in the form of finite 
objects (whether unique or produced in their thousands). In so doing, 
they are merely delivering up to the logic of consumption (i.e. to the 
manipulation of signs) certain contents or symbolic activities which were 
not previously subject to that logic. Producing multiple works does not 
in itself imply any 'vulgarization' or Toss of quality': what happens is 
that, as 'mass-produced' objects, works so produced become effectively 



Mass-media culture 


10 7 


objects of the same kind 'as the pair of stockings and the garden chair', 
and acquire their meaning in relation to those things. They no longer 
stand opposed, as ivorks and as semantic substance - as open significa- 
tions - to other finite objects. They have become finite objects themselves 
and are part of the package, the constellation of accessories by which the 
'socio-culturaT standing of the average citizen is determined. This, at 
least, is what would happen in the best of cases, where everyone really 
did have access to them. For the moment, although they are not artworks 
any longer, these pseudo-works are nonetheless rare objects, economic- 
ally or 'psychologically' inaccessible to most people and sustaining, as 
distinctive objects, a slightly expanded parallel Culture market. 

It is perhaps more interesting - though the problem is the same - to 
look at what is consumed in the weekly instalment encyclopaedias, such 
as La Bible, Les Muses, Alpha, Le Million and in the mass-circulation 
musical and artistic publications, such as Grands peintres and Grands 
musiciens. We know that the audience for these publications is potentially 
very large, embracing all those in the middle classes who are educated to 
secondary or technical level (or whose children are so educated): white- 
collar workers, lower and middle managers. 

To these recent large-scale publications we should also add those 
which, from Science et vie to Historia and the like, have long fed the 
demand for culture of the 'potentially upwardly mobile'. What do they 
want from this frequenting of science, history, music and encyclopaedic 
knowledge - that is to say, of established, legitimate disciplines, the 
contents of which - unlike what is broadcast by the mass media - have a 
specific value? Are they looking to learn something, to acquire a real 
grounding in culture, or do they want a mark of social advancement? 
Are they looking to culture as a practice or as a possession to be 
acquired; are they seeking knowledge or status? Is what we have here a 
'package effect' once again, that effect which, as we have seen, marks out 
- as one sign among others - the object of consumption? 

In the case of Science et vie (we draw in what follows on a reader- 
ship survey of this magazine analysed by the Centre de sociologie 
europeenne), the readers' demands are ambiguous: there is here a 
disguised, clandestine aspiration to acquire 'high-brow' culture by way 
of accession to technical culture. Reading Science et vie is the product of a 
compromise: an aspiration to elite culture is present, but so too is a 
defensive counter-motivation in the form of a rejection of elitism (in 
other words, there is both an aspiration to join the higher class and a 
reaffirmation of class position). More precisely, such reading functions as 
a mark of membership. But membership of what? The abstract community, 
the virtual collective of all those driven by the same ambiguous exigency, 
of all those who also read Science et vie (or Les Muses, etc.). This is an act 
of allegiance of a mythological order: the reader imagines a group whose 
presence he consumes in abstracto through his reading: an unreal, mass 
relationship, which is, quite precisely, the mass communication effect. An 



108 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


undifferentiated complicity which nonetheless constitutes the deeply 
experienced substance of that reading - embodying a value of recogni- 
tion, of membership, of mythic participation (one can detect just this 
same process at work among the readers of the Nouvel Observateur. to 
read that magazine is to affiliate oneself to the readers of that magazine; it 
is to use a 'cultural' activity as a class emblem). 

Naturally, most readers (we should perhaps say, most 'devotees') of 
these mass-circulation publications, which are the vehicles of a 'middle- 
brow' culture, will claim in good faith that they are concerned with their 
content and that their aim is knowledge. But this cultural 'use-value', 
this objective goal, is largely overdetermined by the sociological 
'exchange-value'. It is that demand, indexed to increasingly intense 
status competition, which is met by the vast 'culturalized' material of 
periodicals, encyclopaedias and paperback editions. All this cultural 
substance may be said to be 'consumed', in so far as its content does not 
sustain an autonomous practice, but a rhetoric of social mobility, and in 
so far as it meets a demand which has something other than culture as its 
object or, rather, seeks culture only as a coded element of social status. There 
is here an inversion, and the strictly cultural content appears only as 
connotation, as a secondary function. We can say, then, that it is 
consumed in the same way as a washing machine becomes a consumer 
good at the point where it is no longer an implement but a luxury, 
prestige element. We know that, at that point, it no longer has any 
specific presence and many other objects could be substituted for it - 
culture being, precisely, one of them. Culture becomes an object of 
consumption in so far as, sliding towards another discourse, it becomes 
interchangeable and homogeneous with other objects (even if it remains 
hierarchically superior to them). And this is true not only of Science et vie, 
but also of 'high' culture, 'great' painting, and classical music, etc. All 
these things can be sold together at the drugstore or the newsagents. But 
it is not, strictly speaking, a question of the sales outlet, the size of the 
production run or the 'cultural level' of the audience. If all these things 
are sold and consumed together, that is because culture is subject to the 
same competitive demand for signs as any other category of objects and 
that it is produced to meet that demand 

It is then subject to the same mode of appropriation as other messages, 
objects and images which make up the 'ambience' of our daily life: the 
mode of 'curiosity'. This is not necessarily something frivolous or casual; 
there may be passionate curiosity, particularly among those categories of 
people in process of acculturation. But it presupposes succession, cycles, 
the pressure for changes of fashion. Thus, for the exclusive practice of 
culture as a symbolic system of meaning it substitutes a ludic and 
combinatorial practice of culture as a system of signs. 'Beethoven is 
fabulous!' 

Ultimately, what individuals get from this 'culture' - which excludes 
both the autodidact, the marginal hero of traditional culture, and the 



Mass-media culture 


109 


cultured person, that embalmed humanistic flower on the verge of 
extinction - is cultural 'recycling', an aesthetic recycling which is one of 
the elements of the generalized 'personalization' of the individual, 
of cultural 'show' [faire-valoir] in competitive society and which is the 
equivalent, all other things being equal, of the setting-off or showing-off 
[faire-valoir] of the object by packaging. Industrial aesthetics - design - 
has no aim other than to restore to industrial objects - deeply affected by 
the division of labour and bearing the stamp of their functions - this 
'aesthetic' homogeneity, this formal unity or playful dimension which 
might be said to connect them all in a kind of secondary 'environment' or 
'ambience' function. 

This is the work of those 'cultural designers' one now finds every- 
where: in a society where individuals are severely affected by the 
division of labour and the fragmentary nature of their work, they seek to 
'redesign' them through 'culture', to integrate them into a single formal 
shell, to facilitate interaction in the name of the promotion of culture, to 
promote an ambience for people, as design does for objects. Moreover, 
we should not lose sight of the fact that this packaging, this cultural 
recycling is, like the 'beauty' industrial aesthetics bestows upon objects, 
'undeniably a selling point', to quote Jacques Michel. 'It is an acknow- 
ledged fact today that a pleasant environment, created by harmony of 
shapes and colours and, of course, the quality of materialsj!], has a 
beneficial effect on productivity .' 5 And it is true: acculturated people, like 
designed objects, are better integrated socially and professionally; they 
'fit in' better and are more 'compatible'. One of the happiest hunting 
grounds of the functionalism of human relations is the promotion of 
culture: there 'human design' meets 'human engineering'. 

We need a term which would be to culture what 'Aesthetics' (in the 
sense of industrial aesthetics, the functional rationalization of forms, the 
play of signs) is to beauty as a symbolic system. We have no word for 
this functionalized substance of messages, texts, images, classic master- 
pieces or cartoon strips, this coded 'creativity' and 'receptiveness', which 
have replaced inspiration and sensibility, this collective managed work on 
significations and communication, this 'industrial culturality', haunted 
pell-mell by the cultures of all ages, which we continue, for want of a 
better word, to call 'culture', though we do so at an enormous cost in 
misunderstandings, nurturing a constant dream - in the hyperfunction- 
alism of consumed culture - of the universal, of myths capable of 
deciphering our age without themselves being mythological 'spec- 
taculars', of an art which could decipher modernity without being 
abolished in it. 

Kitsch 

Alongside gadgetry, one of the other major categories of modern object is 
kitsch. The kitsch object is commonly understood as one of that great 



110 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


army of 'trashy' objects, made of plaster of Paris [sfwc] or some such 
imitation material: that gallery of cheap junk - accessories, folksy knick- 
knacks, 'souvenirs', lampshades or fake African masks - which pro- 
liferates everywhere, with a preference for holiday resorts and places of 
leisure. Kitsch is the equivalent of the 'cliche' in speech. And this should 
tell us that, as in the case of the gadget, we are dealing with a category 
which is difficult to define, but which should not be confused with any 
particular real objects. Kitsch can be anywhere: in the detail of an object 
or in the plan of a new residential area, in an artificial flower or in a 
photo-novel. It can best be defined as a pseudo-object or, in other words, as 
a simulation, a copy, an imitation, a stereotype, as a dearth of real 
signification and a superabundance of signs, of allegorical references, 
disparate connotations, as a glorification of the detail and a saturation by 
details. There is, moreover, a close affinity between its internal organiza- 
tion (unconnected superabundance of signs) and its appearance on the 
market (proliferation of disparate objects, a mass-produced accumula- 
tion). Kitsch is a cultural category. 

This proliferation of kitsch, which is produced by industrial reproduc- 
tion and the vulgarization at the level of objects of distinctive signs taken 
from all registers (the bygone, the 'neo', the exotic, the folksy, the 
futuristic) and from a disordered excess of 'ready-made' signs, has its 
basis, like 'mass culture', in the sociological reality of the consumer 
society. This is a mobile society: broad swathes of the population are 
moving up the social ladder, reaching a higher status and, at the same 
time, acceding to cultural demand, which is simply the need to manifest 
that status in signs. At all levels of society, the generations of parvenus 
want their package. There is no point, then, blaming the 'vulgarity' of the 
public or the 'cynical' tactics of the industrialists who wish to shift their 
wares. Though this aspect is important, it cannot explain the cancerous 
excrescence of the mass of 'pseudo-objects'. There has to be a demand, 
and that demand is a function of social mobility. There is no kitsch in a 
society without social mobility. In such a society, a limited range of 
luxury objects suffices as distinctive material for the privileged caste. 
Even the copy of a work of art still has 'authentic' value in the classical 
age. By contrast, it is the great periods of social mobility which see the 
object flourish in other guises: it is with the rising bourgeoisie of the 
Renaissance and the seventeenth century that preciosity and the baroque 
emerge. Though these are not the direct ancestors of kitsch, they already 
bear witness to the growth and fragmentation of distinctive material at a 
time of social pressure and relative hybridity of the upper classes. 
It is, however, mainly since the time of Louis-Philippe in France, the 
Griinder jahre in Germany (1870-90) and the end of the nineteenth century 
and the age of the department stores in all Western societies, that the 
universal knick-knack form has become one of the major manifestations 
of the object and one of the most fruitful branches of commerce. That era 



Mass-media culture 


111 


is unending, since our societies are now potentially in a phase of 
continual mobility. 

Kitsch obviously reaffirms the value of the rare, precious, unique 
object (production of which can also become industrial). Kitsch and the 
'authentic' object thus between them organize the world of consumption 
according to the logic of a distinctive material which is, today, always 
shifting and expanding. Kitsch has a weak distinctive value, but that 
weak value is linked to maximum statistical profitability: entire classes 
seize on it. This can be contrasted with the maximal distinctive quality of 
rare objects, which is connected with their limited supply. We are talking 
here not of beauty, but of distinctiveness, and this is a sociological 
function. In this sense, all objects can be classified hierarchically as 
values, depending on their statistical availability, on their more or less 
limited supply. This function defines at every moment, for a particular 
state of the social structure, the scope afforded to a particular social 
category to distinguish itself and mark its status through a particular 
category of objects or signs. When broader strata accede to a particular 
category of signs, the upper classes are obliged to distance themselves by 
other markers which are limited in number (either by their origin, such 
as paintings or authentic antiques, or systematically, such as luxury 
editions or custom-built cars). In this logic of distinction, kitsch is never 
innovative: it is defined by its derived and weak value. This weak 
valency is, in its turn, one of the reasons for its unlimited multiplication. 
It multiplies in ever greater quantities, whereas, at the top of the social 
ladder, 'classy' objects become fewer in number by increasing in quality and 
are revived by becoming rare. 

This derivative function is once again linked to its 'aesthetic' or anti- 
aesthetic function. To the aesthetics of beauty and originality, kitsch 
opposes its aesthetics of simulation: it everywhere reproduces objects 
smaller or larger than life; it imitates materials (in plaster, plastic, etc.); it 
apes forms or combines them discordantly; it repeats fashion without 
having been part of the experience of fashion. In all this, it is all of a piece 
with the 'gimmicky' gadget in the technical world. That gadget is, 
similarly, a technological parody, an excrescence of useless functions, a 
continual simulation of function without any real, practical referent. This 
aesthetics of simulation is profoundly linked to kitsch's socially assigned 
function of translating social class aspirations and anticipations, of 
expressing the magical affiliation with a culture, with the forms, manners 
and markers of the upper class - an aesthetics of acculturation resulting 
in a subculture of objects . 6 


The Gadget and the Ludic 

The machine was the emblem of industrial society. The gadget is the 
emblem of post-industrial society. No rigorous definition of the gadget 



112 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


exists. If, however, we agree to define the object of consumption by the 
relative disappearance of its objective function (as an implement) and a 
corresponding increase in its sign function, and if we accept that the 
object of consumption is characterized by a kind of functional uselessness 
(what is consumed is precisely something other than the 'useful'), then 
the gadget is indeed the truth of the object in consumer society. Hence, anything 
can become a gadget and everything potentially is one. The gadget might 
be said, then, to be defined by its potential uselessness and its ludic 
combinatorial value. 7 So both sew-on badges, which have had their hour 
of glory, and the 'Venusik', a perfectly 'pure' and useless cylinder 
of polished metal (its only possible use being as a paperweight, the 
function reserved for all absolutely useless objects!), are gadgets. 'Lovers 
of formal beauty and potential uselessness, the fabulous "Venusik" has 
arrived!' 

But the typewriter which can write in 13 different character sets, 
'depending on whether you are writing to your bank manager or your 
lawyer, a very important client or an old friend', is also a gadget - for 
where is 'objective' uselessness to begin? As are the inexpensive home- 
made trinkets and also the IBM dictation machine: 'Imagine a little 
machine (12cm X 15cm) you can have with you everywhere - in the 
office, at weekends and on your travels. You hold it in one hand and, 
with a flick of the thumb, whisper your decisions, dictate your directives, 
hail your victories. Everything you say is committed to its memory . . . 
Whether you are in Rome, Tokyo or New York, your secretary will not 
miss a single one of your syllables.' What could be more useful? What 
could be more useless? When technology is consigned to mental prac- 
tices of a magical type or to modish social practices, then the technical 
object itself becomes a mere gadget again. 

In a car, are the chrome, the two-speed windscreen wipers and the 
electric windows gadgets? Yes and no: they do have some utility in terms 
of social prestige. The contemptuous connotation of the term comes quite 
simply from a moral perspective on the instrumental usefulness of 
objects: some are said to have a use, others not. By what criteria? There is 
no object, even the most marginal and decorative, that does not have 
some use, if only because, in having no use, it becomes once again a 
mark of distinction. 8 Conversely, there is no object which does not, in 
a sense, serve no precise purpose (or which cannot, in other words, 
serve a purpose other than its intended one). There is no way out of this, 
except to define a gadget as something which is explicitly intended for 
secondary functions. Thus, not only the chrome, but also the 'cockpit' 
and the whole car are gadgets if they are part of a logic of fashion and 
prestige or part of a fetishistic logic. And the systematics of objects 
means that this is the dominant tendency for all objects today. 

The world of the pseudo-environment and the pseudo-object is one in 
which all 'functional' 'creators' revel. Take Andre Faye, 'technician of the 
art of living', who creates Louis XVI furniture, the stylish doors of which 



Mass-media culture 


113 


open to reveal the smooth, brilliant surface of a turntable or hi-fi 
speakers: 

His objects move, like Calder's mobiles: both everyday objects and real works 
of art can be designed on this basis. And when set in motion and coordinated 
with chromophonic projections, they come ever closer to the total spectacle to 
which he aspires . . . Cybernetic furniture, desks with variable geometry and 
orientation, a calligraphic Teletype machine ... At long last a telephone fully 
built into the human body to enable you to call New York or answer Honolulu 
from the grounds of a mansion or beside a swimming pool. 

All this, for Faye, represents 'a subjugation of technology to the art of 
living'. And it all irresistibly calls to mind the Concours Lepine . 9 What 
difference is there between the videophone desk and the cold-water- 
based heating system devised by some illustrious inventor? Yet, there is 
a difference. It is that the good old artisanal brainwave was a curious 
excrescence, the mildly unhinged poetry of a heroic technology. The 
gadget, by contrast, is part of a systematic logic which lays hold of the 
whole of daily life in the spectacular mode, and, as a consequence, casts 
a suspicion of artificiality, fakery and uselessness over the whole envi- 
ronment of objects, and, by extension, over the whole environment of 
human and social relations. In its broadest sense, the gadget attempts to 
move beyond the generalized crisis of purpose [finalite ] and usefulness in 
the ludic mode. But it does not - and cannot - attain the symbolic freedom 
the toy has for the child. It is impoverished, a fashion effect, a kind of 
artificial accelerator of other objects; it is caught in a circuit where the 
useful and the symbolic resolve into a kind of combinatorial uselessness, 
as in those 'total' light shows, where the entertainment itself is a 
gimmick or, in other words, a social pseudo-event - a game without 
players. The pejorative resonance the terms 'gadgetry' and 'gimmickry' 
have acquired today ('a mere gadget', 'just gimmickry') no doubt reflects 
both a moral judgement and the anxiety generated by the generalized 
disappearance of use-value and the symbolic function. 

But the reverse is also true. That is to say, the combinatorial 'new look' 
of the gadget can be opposed by - and this is the case for any object, even 
one which is itself a gadget - the exaltedness of the new. The period of 
newness is, in a sense, the sublime period of the object and may, in 
certain cases, attain the intensity, if not the quality, of the emotion of love. 
This phase is one of a symbolic discourse, in which fashion and reference 
to others have no part. It is in this mode of intense relation that the child 
experiences his objects and toys. And it is not the least of the charms, 
later, of a new car, book, gadget or item of clothing that they plunge us 
back into absolute childhood. This is the opposite logic to that of 
consumption. 

The gadget is defined in fact by the way we act with it, which is not 
utilitarian or symbolic in character, but ludic. It is the ludic which 
increasingly governs our relations to objects, persons, culture, leisure 
and, at times, work, and also politics. It is the ludic which is becoming 



114 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


the dominant tone of our daily habitus, to the extent indeed that every- 
thing - objects, goods, relationships, services - is becoming gadgetry or 
gimmickry. The ludic represents a very particular type of investment: it 
is not economic (useless objects) and not symbolic (the gadget/object has 
no soul), but consists in a play with combinations, a combinatorial 
modulation: a play on the technical variants or potentialities of the object 
- in innovation a playing with the rules of play, in destruction a playing 
with life and death as the ultimate combination. Here, our domestic 
gadgets link up once again with slot machines, tirlipots and the other 
cultural radio games, the quiz machine in the drugstore, the car dash- 
board and the whole range of 'serious' technical apparatus which makes 
up the modern 'ambience' of work from the telephone to the computer - 
all those things we play with more or less consciously, fascinated as we 
are by the operation of machines, by childlike discovery and manipula- 
tion, by vague or passionate curiosity for the 'play' of mechanisms, the 
play of colours, the play of variants: this is the very soul of passionate 
play [le jeu-passion], but diffuse and generalized and hence less cogent, 
emptied of its pathos and become mere curiosity - something between 
indifference and fascination, which might be defined by its opposition to 
passion. Passion may be understood as a concrete relation to a total person 
or to some object taken as a person. It implies total investment and 
assumes an intense symbolic value. Whereas ludic curiosity is merely 
interest - albeit violent interest - in the play of elements. 

Take the pinball machine. The player becomes absorbed in the 
machine's noise, jolts and flashing lights. He is playing with electricity. 
As he presses the controls, he has a sense of unleashing impulses and 
currents through a world of multi-coloured wires as complex as a 
nervous system. There is in his play an effect of magical participation in 
science. To grasp this, one has only to observe the crowd which gathers 
around the repair man in a cafe when he opens up the machine. No one 
understands the connections and circuits, but everyone accepts this 
strange world as an incontrovertible datum. There is nothing here of the 
relation of rider to horse, worker to tools or art-lover to work of art. The 
relation of man to object is strictly magical, which is to say that it is 
bewitched and manipulatory. 

This ludic activity may give the appearance of being a passion. But it 
never is. It is consumption - in this case, abstract manipulation of lights, 
'flippers' and electrical reaction times, in other cases, the abstract manip- 
ulation of marks of prestige in the variants of fashion. Consumption is 
combinatorial investment: it is exclusive of passion. 


Pop: an Art of Consumption? 

The logic of consumption, as we have seen, can be defined as a 
manipulation of signs. The symbolic values of creation and the symbolic 



Mass-media culture 


115 


relation of inwardness are absent from it: it is all in externals. The object 
loses its objective finality and its function; it becomes a term in a much 
greater combinatory in sets of objects in which it has a merely relational 
value. Moreover, it loses its symbolic meaning, its millennial anthro- 
pomorphic status, and tends to peter out into a discourse of connotations 
which are also simply relative to one another within the framework of a 
totalitarian cultural system (that is to say, a system which is able to 
integrate all significations whatever their provenance). 

We have based our argument here on the analysis of everyday objects. 
There is, however, another discourse on the object - the discourse of art. 
A history of the changing status of objects and their representation in art 
and literature would itself be revealing. After operating in the whole of 
traditional art as symbolic, decorative props, objects have ceased in the 
twentieth century to be indexed to moral and psychological values; they 
have ceased to live by proxy in the shadow of man and have begun to 
take on extraordinary importance as autonomous elements in an analysis 
of space (Cubism, etc.). They have as a result been fragmented, even to 
the point of abstraction. Having celebrated their parodic resurrection in 
Dada and Surrealism, which were then destructured and volatilized by 
the abstract, they are apparently now reconciled again with their image 
in neo-figuration and pop art. It is here that the question of their 
contemporary status arises: indeed it is forced upon us by their sudden 
elevation to the zenith of artistic figuration. 

In short, is pop the form of art contemporaneous with the logic of 
signs and consumption we are speaking of, or is it merely an effect of 
fashion, and hence itself a pure object of consumption? There is no 
contradiction between the two. We may accept that pop art transposes an 
object-world, while at the same time simply issuing (by its own logic) in 
objects pure and simple. Advertising shares this same ambiguity. 

Let us formulate the matter another way: the logic of consumption 
eliminates the traditional sublime status of artistic representation. There 
is, strictly, no longer any privileging of the essence or signification of the 
object over the image. The one is no longer the truth of the other: they 
coexist in the same physical and logical space, where they also 'operate' 
as signs (in their differential, reversible, combinatorial relation ). 10 
Whereas all art up to pop was based on a 'depth' vision of the world , 11 
pop regards itself as homogeneous with this immanent order of signs: 
homogeneous with their industrial, mass production and hence with the 
artificial, manufactured character of the whole environment, homo- 
geneous with the spatial saturation and simultaneous culturalized 
abstraction of this new order of things. 

Does it succeed in 'rendering' this systematic secularization of objects, 
in 'rendering' this new sign-based [signaletique] environment, which is 
wholly in externals, so that nothing remains of the 'inner light' which 
gave all earlier painting its prestige? Is it an art of the non-sacredl That is 



116 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


to say, an art of pure manipulation? Is it itself a non-sacred art or, in other 
words, an art productive of objects, but not creative? 

Some will say (including the pop artists themselves) that things are 
much simpler: they do what they do because they want to; basically, they 
enjoy doing it; they look around them and paint what they see; it is 
spontaneous realism, etc. This is mistaken. Pop signifies the end of 
perspective, the end of evocation, the end of testimony, the end of the 
creative act and, last but not least, the end of the subversion of the world 
and the curse of art. Its aim is not merely the immanence of the 'civilized' 
world, but its total integration into that world. There is in this a crazy 
ambition, the ambition of abolishing the splendours (and foundations) of 
a whole culture, the culture of transcendence. And there is in it perhaps 
quite simply also an ideology. Let us first remove two objections. First, 
that it is 'an American art' - in the objects it depicts (including the 
obsession with the Stars and Stripes), in its pragmatic, optimistic empir- 
ical practice, in the undeniably chauvinistic infatuation of certain of its 
backers and collectors who have 'identified' with it etc. Though the 
objection is a tendentious one, let us reply to it objectively. If all these 
things are Americanism, the pop artists, following their own logic, cannot 
but sign up to them. If manufactured objects 'speak American', that is 
because they have no other truth than that mythology which swamps 
them - and the only rigorous approach is to integrate this mythological 
discourse and integrate oneself into it. If the consumer society is trapped 
in its own mythology, if it has no critical perspective on itself, and if that 
is precisely its definition , 12 there can be no contemporary art which is not, 
in its very existence and practice, compromised by and complicit with 
that opaquely self-evident state of affairs. This is indeed why the pop 
artists paint objects in terms of their real appearance, since it is in that 
way, as ready-made signs, fresh from the assembly line', that they function 
mythologically. This is why they prefer to paint the brand names, slogans 
and acronyms these objects bear and, in the extreme case, may paint only 
those things (Robert Indiana). This is neither play nor 'realism': it is 
recognizing the obvious truth of the consumer society which is that the 
truth of objects and products is their brand name. If that is 'Americanism', 
then Americanism is the very logic of contemporary culture and one 
cannot fault the pop artists for pointing this up. 

No more, indeed, can one criticize them for their commercial success 
and for accepting it unashamedly. The worst thing would be for them to 
claim some 'accursed' status and thus reinvest themselves with a sacred 
function. It is logical for an art which does not contradict the world of 
objects, but explores its system, to make itself part of that system. It is 
even the end of a hypocrisy and of a radical illogicality. As opposed to 
earlier painting (since the end of the nineteenth century), whose genius 
and transcendence did not prevent it from being a signed object and an 
object marketed in terms of its signature (the abstract expressionists 
pushed this conquering genius and shameful opportunism to its 



Mass-media culture 


117 


extreme), the pop artists reconcile the object of painting and the painting 
as object. Coherence or paradox? In its predilection for objects, its endless 
figuration of 'branded' objects and food products - and also in its 
commercial success - pop is the first art to explore its own status as 
'signed' and 'consumed' art object. 

Yet this logical enterprise, which one cannot but approve even in its 
extreme consequences (even where these contravene our traditional 
aesthetic morality), is accompanied by an ideology into which it is in 
some danger of sinking: an ideology of Nature, of 'Waking-Up' and 
authenticity reminiscent of the best moments of bourgeois spontaneity. 

This 'radical empiricism', 'uncompromising positivism', and 'anti- 
teleologism' sometimes assumes a dangerously initiatory air . 13 Oldenburg 
writes: 

I drove around the city one day with Jimmy Dine. By chance we drove along 
Orchard Street, which is crowded with small stores on both sides. As we drove 
I remember having a vision of The Store. In my mind's eye, I saw a complete 
environment based on this theme. It seemed to me that I had discovered a new 
world. Everywhere I went I began wandering through the different stores as if 
they were museums. I saw the objects displayed in windows as precious works 
of art. 

And Rosenquist: 

Then suddenly the ideas seemed to flow towards me through the window. All 
I had to do was seize them on the wing and start painting. Everything 
spontaneously fell into place - the idea, the composition, the images, the 
colors, everything started to work on its own. 

As is clear from this, the pop artists are not to be outdone by previous 
generations so far as 'Inspiration' is concerned. Since Werther, this theme 
has underpinned the ideality of a Nature to which one only has to be 
faithful to achieve truth. One simply has to awaken or reveal that Nature. 
In John Cage, the musician who inspired Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns, 
we read: 'art should be an affirmation of life - not an attempt to bring 
order . . . but simply a way of ivaking up to the very life we are living, 
which is so excellent, once one gets one's mind, one's desires out of the 
way and lets it act of its own accord.' This assent to a revealed order - 
the universe of images and manufactured objects showing through 
ultimately as a nature - leads to mystico-realist professions of faith: 'A 
flag was just a flag, a number was simply a number' (Jasper Johns) or 
(Cage again): 'We must set about discovering a means to let sounds be 
themselves', which supposes an essence of the object, a level of absolute 
reality that is never that of the everyday environment and which, in 
relation to that environment, constitutes nothing short of a surreality. 
Wesselmann speaks in this way of the 'super-realism' of an ordinary 
kitchen. 

In short, there is total confusion here and what we have is a kind of 
behaviourism composed of a juxtaposition of things seen (something like 
a consumer society impressionism), accompanied by a vague Zen or 



118 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


Buddhist mysticism of the stripping away of the ego or superego to 
rediscover the 'id' of the surrounding world. There is also something 
distinctly American about this curious mixture! 

But there is above all a serious ambiguity and incoherence here. For, by 
presenting the surrounding world not as what it is (first and foremost an 
artificial field of manipulable signs, a total cultural artifact, in which 
neither sensation nor vision are in play, but differential perception and 
the tactical play of significations), but as revealed nature, as essence, pop 
gives itself a dual connotation: on the one hand, it poses as the ideology 
of an integrated society (current society = nature = ideal society, though 
we have seen that this collusion forms part of its logic); on the other, it 
reinstates the whole sacred process of art, which destroys its own basic 
objective. 

Pop lays claim to be the art of the banal (it is on these grounds that it 
calls itself 'pop(ular)' art), but what is the banal but a metaphysical 
category, a modern version of the category of the sublime? The object is 
banal only in its use, in the moment of its use (the 'working' radio in 
Wesselmann's installations). The object ceases to be banal as soon as it 
signifies. Now, we have seen that the 'truth' of the contemporary object is 
no longer to be used for something, but to signify, no longer to be 
manipulated as an instrument, but as a sign. And it is the success of pop, 
at its best, to show it to us as such. 

Andy Warhol, who is the most radical in his approach, is also the artist 
who best sums up the theoretical contradiction in this art practice and 
the difficulties it has in envisaging its real object. He says: 'The canvas is 
an absolutely everyday object, like this chair or that poster' (as ever this 
desire to absorb art, to rehabilitate it, in which there is both American 
pragmatism - terroristic insistence on the useful, integrationist blackmail 
- and something like an echo of the mystique of sacrifice). He adds: 
'Reality needs no intermediary, all you have to do is isolate it from the 
environment and put it on canvas.' Now, this is the whole question: the 
everydayness of this chair (or a particular hamburger, tail-fin or pin-up) 
is precisely its context and, specifically, the mass-produced context of 
all similar or almost similar chairs, etc. Everydayness is difference in 
repetition. By isolating the chair on the canvas, I remove all everydayness 
from it and, at the same time, deprive the canvas of its character of 
everyday object (in which respect, according to Warhol, it should 
absolutely resemble the chair). This is a familiar dead-end: art can 
neither be absorbed into everyday life (the canvas = the chair), nor can it 
grasp the everyday as such (the chair isolated on the canvas = the real 
chair). Immanence and transcendence are equally impossible: they are 
the two aspects of a single dream. 

There is, in short, no essence of the everyday, of the banal, and thus no 
art of the everyday: this is a mystical aporia. If Warhol (and others) 
believe that there is, that is because they delude themselves about the 
very status of art and the artistic act - something far from uncommon 



Mass-media culture 


119 


among artists. Indeed, we find the same mystical nostalgia at the level of 
the productive act: 'I would like to be a machine/ says Andy Warhol, 
who does in fact paint with stencils, silk screens, etc. Now, there can be 
no worse arrogance for art than to pose as machine-like, no greater 
affectation on the part of the person who enjoys the status of creator, 
whether he wishes it or not, than to devote himself to serial automatism. 
Yet, one cannot accuse Warhol or the pop artists of bad faith: their logical 
demand runs up against a sociological and cultural status of art which 
they are powerless to change. It is this powerlessness that is expressed in 
their ideology. When they try to desacralize their practice, society simply 
sacralizes them the more. And we arrive at the situation where their 
attempt - the most radical yet - to secularize art, both in its themes and 
in its practice, leads to a glorification and unprecedented manifestation 
of the sacred in art. Quite simply, the pop artists forget that, for a 
painting to cease to be a sacred super-sign (a unique object, a signature, 
the object of a noble, magical commerce), it is not sufficient to change the 
content of the picture or the artist's intentions: it is the structures of 
the production of culture which decide the matter. Ultimately, only the 
rationalization of the art market, on the same basis as any other indus- 
trial market, could desacralize artworks and restore them to the status of 
everyday objects . 14 This is perhaps neither conceivable, nor possible, nor 
even desirable. Who knows? At any event, it is the limit state: once one 
has reached it, one either stops painting or continues at the cost of sliding 
back into the traditional mythology of artistic creation. It is along this 
fault line that classical pictorial values are rehabilitated: of an 'expres- 
sionist' kind in Oldenburg, fauvist and Matissian in Wesselmann, 'art 
nouveau' and akin to Japanese calligraphy in Lichtenstein, etc. But what 
do these 'legendary' resonances matter to us here? Of what consequence 
are these effects, which make it possible to say that 'this is still painting 
all the same'? The logic of pop lies elsewhere - not in an aesthetic 
computation or a metaphysics of the object. 

One could define pop as a game with - and a manipulation of - the 
different levels of mental perception, a kind of mental Cubism that 
would seek to diffract objects not in terms of a spatial analytics, but in 
terms of the modalities of perception elaborated over the centuries by a 
whole culture on the basis of its intellectual and technical machinery: 
objective reality, image-as-reflection, drawn figuration, technical figura- 
tion (photography), abstract schematization, discursive utterance, etc. On 
the other hand, the use of the phonetic alphabet and industrial tech- 
niques have imposed patterns of division, splitting, abstraction and 
repetition (ethnographers report the bewilderment of primitive peoples 
when they discover several absolutely identical books: their whole vision 
of the world is overturned). We may see in these various modes the 
thousand figures of a rhetoric of designation, of recognition. And this is 
where pop art comes in: it works on the differences between these 
different levels or modes, and on the perception of those differences. For 



120 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


example, the screen print of a lynching is not an evocation of an event: it 
presupposes that the lynching has already been transformed into a news 
item, a journalistic sign, by way of mass communications - a sign taken 
up again at one further remove by the screen print. The same photo- 
graph repeated presupposes the single photograph and, beyond that, the 
real being whose reflection it is. And that real being might indeed figure 
in the work without exploding it: that would merely be one more 
combination. 

Just as there is no order of reality in pop art, only levels of significa- 
tion, so too there is no real space. The only space is that of the canvas, of 
the juxtaposition of the different sign-elements and the relationship 
between them. There is no real time either, the only time being that of the 
reading, the differential perception of the object and its image, of a 
particular image and the same image repeated, etc. This is the time 
necessary for mental adjustment, for accommodation to the image, to the 
artifact in its relation to the real object (we are speaking here not of a 
reminiscence, but of the perception of a local, logical difference). That 
reading will not be the search for connections and coherence either, but 
an onward movement, a registering of succession. 

It is evident that the activity which pop imposes (taking it, once again, 
in its strictest ambition) is far removed from our 'aesthetic sense'. Pop is 
a 'cool' art: it demands not aesthetic ecstasy or affective or symbolic 
participation ('deep involvement'), but a kind of 'abstract involvement', 
a sort of instrumental curiosity. And this retains something of a child-like 
curiosity, a naive enchantment of discovery. And why not? One can also 
see pop as images d'Epinal or a book of hours of consumption, but one 
which particularly brings into play the intellectual reflexes of decoding 
and deciphering discussed above. 

All in all, pop art is not a popular art. For the popular cultural ethos (if 
such a thing exists) is based precisely on an unambiguous realism, on 
linear narration (and not on the repetition or diffraction of levels), on 
allegory and the decorative (and this is not pop art, since these two 
categories refer to 'something other' which is essential), and on emo- 
tional participation linked to the varying fortunes of good and evil 
forces . 15 It is at a truly rudimentary level that pop art can be mistaken for 
a 'figurative' art: a colourful range of images, a naive chronicle of the 
consumer society, etc. It is true that Pop artists have been happy to claim 
that it is such. Their candour is immense, and their ambiguity too. As for 
their humour, or the humour ascribed to them, we are again on shifting 
ground. It might be instructive here to note the reactions of the public. In 
many, the works provoke a moral and obscene laugh (or hint of a laugh) 
- the canvases being indeed obscene to the classical gaze - followed by a 
derisive smile, which might be a judgement on either the objects painted 
or the painting itself. It is a smile which willingly enters into the game: 
'This isn't very serious, but we aren't going to be scandalized by it. And, 
deep down, perhaps . . .' But these reactions are rather strained, amid 



Mass-media culture 


121 


some shameful dejection at not knowing quite what to make of it all. 
Even so, pop is both full of humour and humourless. Quite logically, 
it has nothing to do with subversive, aggressive humour, with the 
telescoping of surrealist objects. It is no longer a question of short- 
circuiting objects in their function, but one of juxtaposing them to 
analyse the relations between them. This approach is not terroristic . 16 At 
most it involves something akin to cultural alienation effects. In fact, 
something quite different is going on here. To return to the system we 
have been describing above, let us not forget that a certain smile is one of 
the obligatory signs of consumption: it no longer represents a humour, a 
critical distance, but is merely a reminder of that transcendent critical 
value which today is given material embodiment in the knowing wink. 
This false distance is present everywhere: in spy films, in Godard, in 
modern advertising, which uses it continually as a cultural allusion. It is 
not really clear in the end whether this 'cool' smile is the smile of 
humour or that of commercial complicity. This is also the case with pop, 
and its smile ultimately encapsulates all its ambiguity: it is not the smile 
of critical distance, but the smile of collusion. 

The Orchestration of Messages 

In TV, radio, press and advertising, we find a discontinuum of signs and 
messages in which all orders are equivalent. A radio sequence taken at 
random includes: 

• an advert for Remington razors; 

• a summary of the last fortnight's social unrest; 

• an advert for Dunlop SP-Sport tyres; 

• a debate on capital punishment; 

• an advert for Lip watches; 

• a report on the war in Biafra; 

• an advert for Crio 'sunflower' washing powder. 

In this litany, in which the drama of world history alternates with objects 
playing walk-on parts (the whole forming a kind of Prevert poem with 
alternating black and rose-tinted pages - the latter the advertising ones, 
of course), the periods of intensity are apparently the news reports. But 
these are also, paradoxically, the periods of neutrality and impersonality: 
the discourse about the world does not seek to generate concern. This 
tonal 'blankness' contrasts with the highly charged nature of the dis- 
course on objects, with its cheery, elated note, its vibrato. All the pathos 
of reality, of unforeseen events, of persuasion is transferred to the object 
and its discourse. This careful balance between the discourse of 'news' 
[information] and the discourse of 'consumption', to the exclusive emo- 
tional advantage of the latter, tends to assign advertising a background 
function, to allot it the role of providing a repetitious, and therefore 
reassuring, backdrop of signs against which the vicissitudes of the world 



122 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


are registered through an intermediary. Those vicissitudes, neutralized 
by the editing, are then ripe, themselves, for simultaneous consump- 
tion. The radio news is not the hotch-potch it seems: its systematic 
alternation imposes a single pattern of reception, which is a pattern of 
consumption. 

And this is not so much because the value accorded to the advertising 
message by its tone suggests that, at bottom, world history is immaterial 
and the only things worth getting excited about are consumer objects. 
That is secondary. The real effect is more subtle: it is the imposition upon 
us, by the systematic succession of messages, of the equivalence of history 
and the minor news item, of the event and the spectacle, of information 
and advertising at the level of the sign. It is not in the direct discourse of 
advertising, but there that the real consumption effect is to be found. 
It is in the segmenting - thanks to the technical media of TV and 
radio - of the event and the world into discontinuous, successive, non- 
contradictory messages - signs which can be juxtaposed and combined 
with other signs within the abstract dimension of the programme. What 
we consume, then, is not a particular spectacle or image in itself, but the 
potential succession of all possible spectacles - and the certainty that the 
law of succession and the segmenting of the schedules will mean that 
there is no danger of anything emerging within them that is not one 
spectacle or one sign among others. 

Medium is Message 

Here, and in this sense at least, we have to accept as a fundamental 
feature of the analysis of consumption McLuhan's formula that 'the 
medium is the message'. This means that the true message the media of 
TV and radio deliver, the one which is decoded and 'consumed' deep 
down and unconsciously, is not the manifest content of sounds and 
images, but the constraining pattern - linked to the very technical 
essence of those media - of the disarticulation of the real into successive 
and equivalent signs: it is the normal, programmed, miraculous transition 
from Vietnam to variety, on the basis of a total abstraction of both. 

And there is something like a law of technological inertia which means 
that the closer one gets to true documentary, to 'live coverage', and the 
more closely the real is pursued with colour, depth and one technical 
improvement after another, the greater does the real absence from the 
world grow. And the more the 'truth' of TV or radio has to be recog- 
nized: that the primary function of each message is to refer to another 
message. So Vietnam refers on to advertising, advertising to the TV 
news, etc., the systematic juxtaposition of these things being the dis- 
cursive mode of the medium, its message, its meaning. But we have to 
recognize that, while speaking to and of itself in this way, the medium is 
imposing a whole system of segmentation and interpretation of the 
world upon us. 



Mass-media culture 


123 


This technological process of mass communications delivers a certain 
kind of very imperative message: a message-consumption message, a 
message of segmentation and spectacularization, of misrecognition of the 
world and foregrounding of information as a commodity, of glorification 
of content as sign. In short, it performs a conditioning function (in the 
advertising sense of the term: in this sense, advertising is the 'mass' 
medium par excellence, and its schemata leave their stamp on all the other 
media) and a function of misrecognition. 

This is true of all the media, even of the book medium, of 'literacy', 
which McLuhan makes one of the central linkages in his theory. He takes 
the view that the emergence of the printed book was a key turning-point 
in our civilization, not so much for the contents (ideological, informa- 
tional, scientific, etc.) it passes down from one generation to another, as 
for the basic constraint of systematization it exerts by virtue of its technical 
essence. He takes the view that the book is, first and foremost, a technical 
model, and that the order of communication prevailing within it (visual- 
ized segmentation, letters, words, pages, etc.) is a more influential, more 
determining model in the long term than any particular symbol, idea or 
fantasy that makes up its manifest content: 'The effects of technology do 
not occur at the level of opinions or concepts, but alter sense ratios or 
patterns of perception steadily and without any resistance .' 17 

Self-evidently, most of the time, the content conceals from us the real 
function of the medium. It presents itself as a message, whereas the real 
message, with regard to which the manifest discourse is perhaps mere 
connotation, is the deep structural change (of scale, of model, of habitus) 
wrought in human relations. Crudely put, the 'message' of the railways 
is not the coal or the passengers it carries, but a vision of the world, the 
new status of urban areas, etc. The 'message' of TV is not the images it 
transmits, but the new modes of relating and perceiving it imposes, the 
alterations to traditional family and group structures. And we may go 
even further and say that, in the case of TV and the modern mass media, 
what is received, assimilated and 'consumed' is not so much a particular 
spectacle as the potentiality of all spectacles. 

This, then, is the truth of the mass media: it is their function to 
neutralize the lived, unique, eventual character of the world and sub- 
stitute for it a multiple universe of media which, as such, are homo- 
geneous one with another, signifying each other reciprocally and 
referring back and forth to each other. In the extreme case, they each 
become the content of the others - and that is the totalitarian 'message of a 
consumer society. 

What the TV medium conveys by its technical organization is the idea 
(the ideology) of a world endlessly visualizable, endlessly segmentable 
and readable in images. It conveys the ideology of the omnipotence of a 
system of reading over a world become a system of signs. TV images present 
themselves as the metalanguage of an absent world. Just as the smallest 
technical object, the tiniest gadget, is a promise of a universal technical 



124 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


Assumption, so images/ signs are a presumption of an exhaustive imag- 
ining of the world, of a total assumption of the mode of reality into the 
image, which might be regarded as its memory, its universal decoding 
unit. Behind the 'consumption of images' looms the imperialism of a 
system of reading: increasingly, only what can be read (what must be 
read: the 'legendary') will tend to exist. And there will no longer be any 
question then of the truth of the world, or its history, but only of the 
internal coherence of the system of reading. Thus, on a confused, 
conflictual, contradictory world, each medium imposes its own more 
abstract, more coherent logic; it imposes itself - a medium - as message, 
to use McLuhan's expression. And it is the substance of the fragmented, 
filtered world, the world reinterpreted in terms of this simultaneously 
technical and 'legendary' code, that we 'consume' - the entire material of 
the world, the whole of culture industrially processed into finished 
products, into sign material, from which all eventual, cultural or political 
value has vanished. 

If we regard the sign as the articulation of a signifier and a signified, 
we may specify two types of confusion. For the child, or the 'primitive', 
the signifier may fade in favour of the signified (as when the child 
mistakes its own image for a living being, or African TV viewers ask 
where the man who has just disappeared from the screen has gone). 
Conversely, in the self-centred image or the code-centred message, the 
signifier becomes its own signified, a circular confusion between the two 
arises to the signifier's advantage, and we see the abolition of the 
signified and the tautology of the signifier. This is what defines consump- 
tion, the systematic consumption effect at the level of the mass media. 
Instead of going out to the world via the mediation of the image, it is the 
image which circles back on itself via the world (it is the signifier which 
designates itself under cover of the signified). 

We move from the message centred on the signified - a transitive 
message - to the message centred on the signifier. For example (in the 
case of TV), from events signified by the image to the consumption of the 
image as such - i.e. precisely as something different from those events, as 
spectacular - Brecht would say 'culinary' - substance, exhausting itself in 
the very time-span of its absorption, and never referring on beyond. 
Different too in the sense that it does not offer events to be either seen or 
understood in their (historical, social or cultural) specificity, but delivers 
them up, all without distinction reinterpreted in terms of the same code 
which is at once an ideological structure and a technical structure - i.e., in 
the case of TV, the ideological code of mass culture (a system of moral, 
social and political values) and the mode of segmentation, of articulation 
of the medium itself, which imposes a certain type of discursivity that 
neutralizes the multiple and shifting content of messages and substitutes 
its own imperative constraints of meaning. Unlike the manifest discourse 
of the images, this deep-level discursivity of the medium is decoded 
unconsciously by the viewer. 



Mass-media culture 


125 


The Advertising Medium 

In this sense, advertising is perhaps the most remarkable mass medium 
of our age. Just as, when it speaks of a particular object, it potentially 
glorifies all of them, and in referring to a particular object and brand it 
speaks in fact of the totality of objects and a world made up in its totality 
of objects and brands, so, in targeting each consumer, it is targeting them 
all, and in addressing each individual, it is addressing them all, thus 
simulating a consumer totality, retribalizing consumers in the McLuhan- 
esque sense of the term, i.e. through a complicity, an immanent, immedi- 
ate collusion at the level of the message, but above all at the level of the 
medium itself and the code. Every image, every advertisement imposes a 
consensus - that between all the individuals potentially called upon to 
decipher it, that is to say, called on, by decoding the message, to 
subscribe automatically to the code in which it has been couched. 

It is not, then, its contents, its modes of distribution or its manifest 
(economic and psychological) objectives which give advertising its mass 
communication function; it is not its volume, or its real audience (though 
all these things are important and have a support function), but its very 
logic as an autonomized medium, i.e. as an object referring not to real 
objects, not to a real world or a referential dimension, but from one sign to 
the other, from one object to the other, from one consumer to the other. In the 
same way, books become means of mass communication if they link the 
person who reads them with all those who read them (reading a book is 
not, in that case, a matter of meaning content, but a pure and simple sign 
of cultural complicity), or if the book/ object links up with others in the 
same collection, etc. One might analyse how language itself, a symbolic 
system, reverts to being a mass medium at the level of the brand name 
and the language of advertising. Mass communication is everywhere 
defined by this systematization at the level of the technical medium and 
the code, by the systematic production of messages not from the world, 
but from the medium itself . 18 


Pseudo-Event and Neo-Reality 

We enter here the world of the pseudo-event, of pseudo-history and 
pseudo-culture which is discussed by Boorstin in The Image. By this he 
means a world of events, history, culture and ideas not produced from 
shifting, contradictory, real experience, but produced as artifacts from 
elements of the code and the technical manipulation of the medium. It is this, 
and nothing else, which defines all signification whatsoever as consum- 
able. It is this generalization of the substitution of the code for the referential 
dimension which defines mass-media consumption. 

The raw event is exchange: it is not material for exchange. It only 
becomes 'consumable' when filtered, fragmented and reworked by a 



126 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


whole industrial chain of production - the mass media - into a finished 
product, a material of combined, finite signs, analogous to the finished 
products of industrial production. This is the same operation make-up 
performs on the face: for real but discordant features, the systematic 
substitution of a network of abstract but coherent messages made up 
from technical elements and a code of imposed significations (the code of 
'beauty'). 

We have to beware of interpreting this gigantic enterprise of produc- 
tion of the artificial and the cosmetic, of pseudo-objects and pseudo- 
events, which is invading our daily existence, as a denaturing or 
falsifying of an 'authentic' content. We can see from all that has just been 
said that the abduction of meaning, the depoliticization of politics, the 
deculturing of culture and the desexualization of the body in mass- 
media consumption occurs in a region far beyond the mere 'tendentious' 
reinterpretation of content. It is in the form that everything has changed: a 
neo-reality has everywhere been substituted for reality, a neo-reality 
entirely produced by combining elements of the code. Over the whole 
span of daily life, a vast process of simulation is taking place, similar in 
style to the 'simulation models' through which the operational and 
cybernetic sciences work. A model is 'built' by combining features or 
elements of reality, and an event, a structure or a future situation is 
'played out on' those elements, and tactical conclusions are drawn from 
this with which to operate on reality. In a controlled scientific procedure, 
this can serve as an instrument of analysis. In mass communications, it 
assumes force of reality: reality itself is abolished, obliterated, in favour of 
this neo-reality of the model, which is given material force by the medium 
itself. 

However, let us once again beware of language, which speaks auto- 
matically of the 'false', the 'pseudo' or the 'artificial'. And let us turn 
again, with Boorstin, to the subject of advertising in order to try to grasp 
this new logic, which is also a new practice and a new 'mentality'. 

Beyond the True and the False 

Advertising has a strategic position in this process. It is the reign of the 
pseudo-event par excellence. It turns the object into an event. In fact, it 
constructs it as such by eliminating its objective characteristics. It con- 
structs it as a model, as a spectacular news item. 'Modern advertising 
began when the advertisement was no longer a spontaneous announce- 
ment and had become "made news" ' 19 (it is in this way that advertising 
becomes homogeneous with 'news', which is itself subjected to the same 
labour of 'myth-making': advertising and 'news' thus constitute a single 
visual, written, phonic and mythic substance; they succeed each other 
and alternate in all the media in a way which seems natural to us - 
they give rise to the same curiosity and the same spectacular/ludic 
absorption ). 20 



Mass-media culture 


12 7 


Journalists and advertisers are mythic operators : they present the object 
or the event as drama, as fiction. They 'offer it up reinterpreted' and 
might even, at a pinch, construct it deliberately If we wish to judge 
objectively, then, we must apply the categories of myth to them: this 
latter is neither true nor false and the question is not whether one 
believes in it or not. That indeed gave rise to two false problems which 
are endlessly debated: 

1 Do advertising executives believe in what they do? (If they did, they 
could be partly forgiven.) 

2 Don't consumers ultimately believe in advertising? (If they did, they 
would be partly saved.) 

So, Boorstin argues that advertisers should not be blamed, since the 
source of the persuasion and mystification was not so much their 
unscrupulousness as our pleasure at being deceived: it was not so much 
their desire to seduce, as our desire to be seduced. And he takes the 
example of Barnum, whose 'great discovery was not how easy it was to 
deceive the public, but rather, how much the public enjoyed being 
deceived'. 21 This is a seductive hypothesis, but a false one. This whole 
state of affairs is not based on some sort of reciprocal perversity, some 
cynical manipulation or collective masochism revolving around the true 
and the false. The truth is that advertising (like the other mass media) 
does not deceive us: it is beyond the true and the false, just as fashion is 
beyond ugliness and beauty and the modern object, in its sign function, 
is beyond usefulness and uselessness. 

The problem of the 'veracity' of advertising should be posed as 
follows: if advertising men really 'lied', they would be easy to unmask. 
But they do not. And if they do not, this is not because they are too 
intelligent, but because 'the advertiser's art . . . consists largely of the art 
of making persuasive statements which are neither true nor false.' 22 For 
the good reason that there is no longer either any original or any real 
referential dimension and, like all myths and magic formulas, advertis- 
ing is based on a different kind of verification, that of the self-fulfilling 
prophecy. 'The successful advertiser is the master of a new art: the art of 
making things true by saying they are so. He is a devotee of the 
technique of the self-fulfilling prophecy.' 23 

Advertising is prophetic language, in so far as it promotes not learning 
or understanding, but hope. What it says presupposes no anterior truth 
(that of the object's use-value), but an ulterior confirmation by the reality 
of the prophetic sign it sends out. This is how it achieves its end. It turns 
the object into a pseudo-event, which will become the real event of daily 
life through the consumer's endorsing its discourse. We can see that the 
true and the false are indiscernible here, just as they are in political 
opinion polls where we no longer know whether the real vote is simply 
ratifying the polls (and it is, then, no longer a real event, but merely a 
substitute for the polls which, from having been simulations that are 



128 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


statistical indicators, have become determining agents of reality) or whether 
the polls are reflecting public opinion. This is an inextricable tangle. Just 
as nature imitates art, so daily life ends up being the replica of the 
model. 

The mode of 'self-fulfilling prophecy' is the tautological mode. Reality 
is no longer anything but the model speaking itself. So it is with magical 
formulas, so it is with simulations and so also with advertising which, 
among other styles of discourse, plays - for preference - on the tauto- 
logical. Everything in that discourse is a 'metaphor' for one and the same 
thing: the brand. The expressions 'a better beer' (than what?), 'Lucky 
Strike, a toasted cigarette' (of course it's toasted; they all are!) merely 
refer back to a spiral of self-evidence. When Hertz ('the world no. 1 for 
car hire') says, at the end of a long advertisement, 'Be logical. If you did 
not find that little something more with us, we would not have reached 
the position we have today . . . And someone else perhaps would be 
placing this advertisement', what is this but pure tautology and circular 
argument? Everywhere, repetition itself functions as efficient causality in 
this way. Just as molecules are artificially synthesized in certain labor- 
atories, so truth is 'artificially synthesized' here from efficient speech. 
'Persil washes whitest' is not a sentence; it is Persil-speak. This and other 
advertising syntagms do not explain, do not offer any meaning, and are 
therefore neither true nor false, but they eliminate precisely both mean- 
ing and proof. They substitute an unadorned indicative, which is a 
repetitive imperative. And that tautology of discourse seeks, as in the 
magic formula, to induce tautological repetition by the event. The con- 
sumer, by his purchase, will merely ratify the coming to pass of the myth. 

We might pursue the analysis of advertising discourse further in this 
direction, and we might also extend it to the various modern media. If 
we did so, we should see that everywhere, in a radical inversion of the 
traditional logic of signification and interpretation based on truth and 
falsehood, it is here the myth (or the model) which finds its event - by 
means of a production of speech which is now industrialized on the 
same basis as the production of material goods. 



8 


The Finest Consumer Object: 
The Body 


In the consumer package, there is one object finer, more precious and 
more dazzling than any other - and even more laden with connotations 
than the automobile, in spite of the fact that that encapsulates them 
all. That object is the body. Its 'rediscovery', in a spirit of physical and 
sexual liberation, after a millennial age of puritanism; its omnipresence 
(specifically the omnipresence of the female body, a fact we shall have to 
try to explain) in advertising, fashion and mass culture; the hygienic, 
dietetic, therapeutic cult which surrounds it, the obsession with youth, 
elegance, virility /femininity, treatments and regimes, and the sacrificial 
practices attaching to it all bear witness to the fact that the body has 
today become an object of salvation. It has literally taken over that moral 
and ideological function from the soul. 

Unremitting propaganda reminds us that, in the words of the old 
hymn, we have only one body and it has to be saved . 1 For centuries, 
there was a relentless effort to convince people they had no bodies 
(though they were never really convinced); today, there is a relentless 
effort to convince them of their bodies. There is something strange about 
this. Is not the body the most obvious of things? It seems not. The body 
is a cultural fact. Now, in any culture whatsoever, the mode of organiza- 
tion of the relation to the body reflects the mode of organization of 
the relation to things and of social relations. In a capitalist society, the 
general status of private property applies also to the body, to the way we 
operate socially with it and the mental representation we have of it. In 
the traditional order - in the case of the peasant, for example - there was 
no narcissistic investment or spectacular perception of his body, but an 
instrumental /magical vision, induced by the labour process and the 
relation to nature. 

What we want to show is that the current structures of production/ 
consumption induce in the subject a dual practice, linked to a split (but 
profoundly interdependent) representation of his/her own body: the 
representation of the body as capital and as fetish (or consumer object). 
In both cases, it is important that, far from the body being denied or left 
out of account, there is deliberate investment in it (in the two senses, 
economic and psychical, of the term). 



130 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


The Secret Keys to Your Body 

A fine example of this managed reappropriation of the body is provided 
by Elle, in an article entitled The secret keys to your body which unlock 
the door to complex-free living'. 

'Your body is both your outer limit and your sixth sense/ the article 
begins, and it assumes a serious air by recounting the psycho-genesis of 
the appropriation of the body and its image: 'At around six months, you 
began to perceive, as yet very obscurely, that you had a distinct body.' 
After an allusion to the mirror-stage ('psychologists call this . . .') and a 
timid allusion to erogenous zones ('Freud says that . . .'), it comes to the 
central point: 'Are you at ease in your body?' Right away, in comes 
Brigitte Bardot (BB): she 'is at ease in her body'. 'Everything about her is 
beautiful: her neck, her back, particularly the small of the back . . . BB's 
secret? She really inhabits her body. She is like a little animal who 
precisely fills up her dress.' (Does she inhabit her body or her dress? 
Which of these, the body or the dress, is her second home? This is 
precisely the point: she wears her body like a dress, and this makes 
'inhabiting' a fashion effect, a 'package' effect, and relates it to a ludic 
principle which is further reinforced by the 'little animal' reference.) If, in 
the past, it was 'the soul which clothed the body', today it is the skin 
which clothes it, though not the skin as irruption of nudity (and, hence, 
of desire), but as prestige garment and second home, as sign and as 
fashion reference (and therefore substitutable for the dress without 
change of meaning, as can be seen in the current exploitation of nudity in 
the theatre and elsewhere, where, in spite of the false sexual pathos, it 
appears as one more term in the fashion paradigm). 

Let us return to our text. 'You have to be in touch with yourself, you 
have to learn to read your body' (if you don't, you are anti-BB). 

Lie on the ground and stretch out your arms. Now run the middle finger of 
your right hand very slowly along that invisible line which runs from the ring 
finger right along the arm to the crook of the elbow and the armpit. You'll find 
the same line on your legs. These are lines of sensitivity. This is your carte du 
tendre . 2 There are other lines of tendre sse: along the spinal column, on the nape 
of the neck, the stomach, the shoulders ... If you do not know them, then 
repression occurs in your body, as it does in your psyche . . . The territories of 
the body which your sensitivity does not inhabit, which your thinking does 
not visit, are ill-favoured areas . . . The circulation there is poor; there is a lack 
of muscle tone. Or, alternatively, cellulite[!] tends to settle there once and for 
all. 

In other words: if you don't make your bodily devotions, if you sin by 
omission, you will be punished. Everything that ails you comes from 
being culpably irresponsible towards yourself (your own salvation). 
Quite apart from the atmosphere of singular moral terrorism which 
infuses this carte du tendre (and which equates with puritan terrorism, 
except that in this case it is no longer God punishing you, but your own 
body - a suddenly maleficent, repressive agency which takes its revenge 



The body 


131 


if you are not gentle with it), one can see how this discourse, under the 
guise of reconciling everyone with their own body, does in fact reintro- 
duce, between the subject and the objectivized body as threatening 
double, the same relations which are those of social life, the same 
determinations which are those of social relations: blackmail, repression, 
persecution syndrome, conjugal neurosis (the same women who read 
this will read a few pages further on that if they are not affectionate to 
their husbands, they will bear the responsibility for the failure of their 
marriages). Apart, then, from this latent terrorism, directed in Elle more 
particularly at women, what is interesting is the suggestion that one 
should revert back into one's own body and invest it narcissistically 
'from the inside', not in any sense to get to know it in depth, but, by a 
wholly fetishistic and spectacular logic, to form it into a smoother, more 
perfect, more functional object for the outside world. This narcissistic 
relation - it is a managed narcissism, operating on the body as in 
colonized virgin 'territory', 'affectionately' [tendrement] exploring the 
body like a deposit to be mined in order to extract from it the visible 
signs of happiness, health, beauty, and the animality which triumphs in 
the marketplace of fashion - finds its mystical expression in the readers' 
confessions which follow: 'I was discovering my body. I could feel it in 
all its purity.' And, even better: 'It was as though I was being hugged by 
my body. I began to love it. And, loving it, I wanted to care for it with the 
same affection I felt for my children.' What is significant is this regressive 
involution of affectivity into the body-as-child, the body-as-trinket - 
inexhaustible metaphor of a penis cherished, cradled and . . . castrated. 
In this sense, the body, become the finest object of solicitude, monopol- 
izes for itself all so-called normal affectivity (towards other real persons), 
without, however, taking on a value of its own, since, in this process of 
affective rerouting [ detournement ], any other object can, by the same 
fetishistic logic, play this role. The body is simply the finest of these 
psychically possessed, manipulated and consumed objects. 

But the main thing is that this narcissistic reinvestment, orchestrated 
as a mystique of liberation and accomplishment, is in fact always 
simultaneously an investment of an efficient, competitive, economic 
type. The body 'reappropriated' in this way is reappropriated first to 
meet 'capitalist' objectives: in other words, where it is invested, it is 
invested in order to produce a yield. The body is not reappropriated for 
the autonomous ends of the subject, but in terms of a normative principle 
of enjoyment and hedonistic profitability, in terms of an enforced instru- 
mentality that is indexed to the code and the norms of a society of 
production and managed consumption. In other words, one manages 
one's body; one handles it as one might handle an inheritance; one 
manipulates it as one of the many signifiers of social status. The woman 
who said she 'wanted to care for it with the same affection [she] felt for 
[her] children' immediately adds: 'I began to visit beauticians . . . The 
people who saw me after that crisis found me happier, better look- 



132 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


ing.' 'Recuperated' as an instrument of enjoyment and an indicator of 
prestige, the body is then subjected to a labour of investment (solicitude, 
obsession) which, once the myth of liberation that acts as cover is peeled 
away, doubtless represents a more profoundly alienated labour than the 
exploitation of the body as labour power . 3 


Functional Beauty 

In this long process of sacralization of the body as exponential value, of 
the functional body - that is to say, the body which is no longer 'flesh' as 
in the religious conception, or labour power as in industrial logic, but is 
taken up again in its materiality (or its 'visible' ideality) as narcissistic 
cult object or element of social ritual and tactics - beauty and eroticism 
are two major leitmotivs. 

They are inseparable and the two together institute this nezv ethics of the 
relation to the body. Though valid for both men and women, they are, 
nevertheless, differentiated into feminine and masculine poles. The two 
opposing models - the basic elements of which are largely interchange- 
able - might be termed phryneism 4 and athleticism. Still, the feminine 
model has a kind of priority: it is this model which, to some extent, 
functions as the template of this new ethics. And it is not by chance that 
it is in Elle that we find the type of material we have analysed above . 5 

For women, beauty has become an absolute, religious imperative. 
Being beautiful is no longer an effect of nature or a supplement to moral 
qualities. It is the basic, imperative quality of those who take the same 
care of their faces and figures as they do of their souls. It is a sign, at the 
level of the body, that one is a member of the elect, just as success is such 
a sign in business. And, indeed, in their respective magazines, beauty 
and success are accorded the same mystical foundation: for women, it is 
sensitivity, exploring and evoking 'from the inside' all the parts of the 
body; for the entrepreneur, it is the adequate intuition of all the possibil- 
ities of the market. A sign of election and salvation: the Protestant ethic is 
not far away here. And it is true that beauty is such an absolute 
imperative only because it is a form of capital. 

Let us take this same logic a little further. The ethics of beauty, which 
is the very ethics of fashion, may be defined as the reduction of all 
concrete values - the 'use-values' of the body (energetic, gestural, sexual) 
- to a single functional 'exchange-value', which itself alone, in its 
abstraction, encapsulates the idea of the glorious, fulfilled body, the idea 
of desire and pleasure [jouissance], and of course thereby also denies and 
forgets them in their reality and in the end simply peters out into an 
exchange of signs. For beauty is nothing more than sign material being 
exchanged. It functions as sign-value. That is why we can say that the 
beauty imperative is one of the modalities of the functional imperative, 
this being valid for objects as much as it is for women (and men), the 



The body 


133 


beautician every woman has become being the counterpart of the 
designer and stylist in the business sphere. 

Moreover, if we look at the dominant principles of industrial aesthetics 
(functionalism), we can see that they apply generally to the charter for 
beauty: BB feeling 'at ease in her body' or 'precisely filling] up her dress' 
is part of this same pattern of the 'harmonious marriage of function and 
form'. 

Functional Eroticism 

Alongside beauty, as we have just defined it, sexuality everywhere 
orientates the 'rediscovery' and consumption of the body today. The 
beauty imperative, which is an imperative of turning the body to 
advantage by way of narcissistic reinvestment, involves the erotic as 
sexual foil. We have clearly to distinguish the erotic as a generalized 
dimension of exchange in our societies from sexuality properly so called. 
We have to distinguish the erotic body - substrate of the exchanged signs 
of desire - from the body as site of fantasy and abode of desire. In the 
drive /body, the fantasy /body, the individual structure of desire predom- 
inates. In the 'eroticized' body, it is the social function of exchange which 
predominates. In this sense, the erotic imperative - which, like courtesy 
or so many other social rituals, is mediated by an instrumental code of 
signs - is merely (like the aesthetic imperative in beauty) a variant or 
metaphor of the functional imperative. 

The Elle woman is 'hot' with that same heat, that same warmth one 
finds in modern furniture: it is an 'atmospheric' heat. It no longer comes 
from intimacy and sensuality, but from calculated sexual signification. 
Sensuality is heat. This sexuality, for its part, is hot and cold, like the play 
of warm and cold colours in a 'functional' interior. It has the same 
'whiteness' as the enveloping forms of 'stylized', 'dressed-up' modern 
objects. But it is also not a 'frigidity', as has been suggested, since 
frigidity still implies a sexual resonance of violation. The fashion model 
is not frigid: she is an abstraction. 

The fashion model's body is no longer an object of desire, but a 
functional object, a forum of signs in which fashion and the erotic are 
mingled. It is no longer a synthesis of gestures, even if fashion photo- 
graphy puts all its artistry into re-creating gesture and naturalness by a 
process of simulation . 6 It is no longer, strictly speaking, a body, but a 
shape. 

This is where all modern censors are misled (or are content to be 
misled): the fact is that in advertising and fashion naked bodies (both 
women's and men's) refuse the status of flesh, of sex, of finality of desire, 
instrumentalizing rather the fragmented parts of the body in a gigantic 
process of sublimation, of denying the body in its very evocation . 7 

Just as the erotic is never in desire but in signs, so the functional 
beauty of the fashion models is never in their expressions but in their 



134 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


'figures'. Irregularity or ugliness would bring out a meaning again: they 
are excluded. For beauty here is wholly in abstraction, in emptiness, in 
ecstatic absence and transparency. This disembodiment is ultimately 
encapsulated in the gaze. These fascinating/fascinated, sunken eyes, this 
objectless gaze - both oversignification of desire and total absence of 
desire - are beautiful in their empty erection, in the exaltation of their 
censorship. That is their functionality. Medusa eyes, eyes themselves 
turned to stone, pure signs. Thus, all along the unveiled, exalted body, in 
these spectacular eyes, eyes ringed by fashion, not by pleasure, it is the 
very meaning of the body, the truth of the body which vanishes in a 
hypnotic process. It is to this extent that the body - particularly the 
female body and, most particularly, the body of that absolute model, the 
fashion mannequin - constitutes itself as an object that is the equivalent 
to the other sexless and functional objects purveyed in advertising. 


Pleasure Principle and Productive Force 

Conversely, the least of objects, implicitly cathected on the pattern of the 
female body /object, is fetishized in this same way. Hence the generalized 
imbuing of the whole field of 'consumption' by eroticism. This is not a 
fashion in the lighter sense of the term; it is the specific, rigorous logic of 
fashion. Bodies and objects form a network of homogeneous signs which 
may, on the basis of the abstraction we have just discussed, exchange 
their significations (this is, properly speaking, their 'exchange-value') 
and 'show each other off [se faire valoir] mutually'. 

This homology between bodies and objects takes us into the deep mechan- 
isms of managed consumption. If the 'rediscovery of the body' is always 
the rediscovery of the body/object in the generalized context of other 
objects, one can see how easy, logical and necessary a transition there is 
from the functional appropriation of the body to the appropriation of 
goods and objects in shopping. And we know, indeed, to what extent the 
modern eroticism and aesthetics of the body are steeped in an environ- 
ment teeming with products, gadgets and accessories in an atmosphere 
of total sophistication. From hygiene to make-up (not forgetting suntans, 
exercise and the many 'liberations' of fashion), the rediscovery of the 
body takes place initially through objects. It even seems that the only 
drive that is really liberated is the drive to buy. We may recall here the 
example of the woman who, having suddenly fallen madly in love with 
her body, dashes off to the beauty parlour. And there is also the more 
common, opposite case: all those women who go in for all the eaux de 
toilette, massages and treatments in the hope of 'rediscovering their 
bodies'. The theoretical equivalence between bodies and objects as signs 
is what in fact makes possible the magical equation: 'Buy - and you will 
be at ease in your body.' 

This is where all the psycho-functionality analysed above assumes its 



The body 


135 


full economic and ideological meaning. The body sells products. Beauty 
sells products. Eroticism sells products. And this is not the least of the 
reasons which, in the last instance, orientate the entire historical process 
of the 'liberation of the body'. It is the same with the body as it is with 
labour power. It has to be 'liberated, emancipated' to be able to be 
exploited rationally for productivist ends. Just as freedom to dispose of 
oneself and personal interest - the formal principles of the individual 
freedom of the worker - have to operate for labour power to be able to 
transform itself into the demand for wages and exchange-value, so the 
individual has to rediscover his body and invest it narcissistically - the 
formal principle of pleasure - for the force of desire to be able to transform 
itself into a demand for rationally manipulable objects/signs. The individ- 
ual has to take himself as object, as the finest of objects, as the most precious 
exchange material, for an economic process of profit generation to be established 
at the level of the deconstructed body, of deconstructed sexuality. 


Modern Strategy of the Body 

However, this productivist objective, this economic process of profit 
generation, by which the social structures of production are generalized 
at the level of the body, is doubtless still secondary to the goals of 
integration and social control set in place by the whole mythological and 
psychological apparatus centred around the body. 

In the history of ideologies, those relating to the body long had an 
offensive, critical value against the ideologies of the spiritualist, puritan, 
moralizing type which were centred on the soul or some other non- 
material principle. Since the Middle Ages, all heresies have been to some 
extent claims of the flesh, the advance resurrection of bodies against the 
rigid dogma of the Churches (this is the 'Adamical' tendency, which 
reappeared repeatedly, always to be condemned by orthodoxy). Since the 
eighteenth century, sensualist, empiricist, materialist philosophy has 
demolished the traditional spiritualist dogmas. It would be interesting to 
make a detailed analysis of the very long process of historical disintegra- 
tion of that fundamental value called the soul, around which the whole 
individual scheme of salvation was organized and also, of course, the 
whole process of social integration. This long desacralization and secu- 
larization in favour of the body has run through the whole of the 
Western era: the values of the body have been subversive values, sources 
of the most acute ideological contradiction. But how do matters stand 
today when these values are largely uncontested and have gained 
acceptance as a new ethic (there is much to be said on this subject: we are 
now, rather, in a phase in which the puritan and hedonist ideologies are 
concertinaed, their themes intermingling at every level)? We can see that 
the body today, apparently triumphant, instead of still constituting a 
living, contradictory force, a force for 'demystification', has quite simply 



136 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


taken over from the soul as mythic instance, as dogma and as salvational 
scheme. Its 'discovery', which for many centuries represented a critique 
of the sacred, a call for greater freedom, truth and emancipation - in 
short a battling for humanity, against God - today occurs as an act of 
resacralization. The cult of the body no longer stands in contradiction to 
the cult of the soul: it is the successor to that cult and heir to its 
ideological function. As Norman O. Brown says in Life against Death: “We 
must not be misled by the flat antinomy of the sacred and the secular, 
and interpret as "secularization" what is only a metamorphosis of the 
sacred .' 8 

The material evidence of the 'liberated' body (though, as we have seen, 
liberated as sign/ object and censored in its subversive truth as desire, 
not only in athletic activity and hygiene, but also in eroticism) must not 
be allowed to deceive us here: it merely expresses the supplanting of an 
outdated ideology - that of the soul, which is inadequate for a developed 
productivist system and incapable now of ensuring ideological integra- 
tion - by a more functional modern ideology which, in all essentials, 
preserves the individualistic value system and the social structures 
connected with it. And it even reinforces these, establishing them on an 
almost permanent basis, since it substitutes for the transcendence of the 
soul the total immanence, the spontaneous self-evidence of the body. 
Now, that self-evidence is false evidence. The body as instituted by 
modern mythology is no more material than the soul. Like the soul, it is 
an idea or, rather - since the term 'idea' does not mean much - it is a 
hypostasized part-object, a double privileged and invested as such. It has 
become, as the soul was in its time, the privileged substrate of objectivi- 
zation - the guiding myth of an ethic of consumption. We can see how 
intimately the body is involved in the goals of production as (economic) 
support, as principle of the managed (psychological) integration of the 
individual, and as (political) strategy of social control. 


Is the Body Feminine? 

Let us come back to the question we set aside at the beginning of this 
chapter: that of the role which falls to woman and the female body as 
privileged vehicle of Beauty, Sexuality and managed Narcissism. For if it 
is clear that this process of reduction of the body to aesthetic/erotic 
exchange-value affects both the male and the female (we have suggested 
two terms for this, athleticism and phryneism, phryneism being defined 
roughly as the woman of Elle and the fashion magazines, masculine 
athleticism finding its wider model in the athleticism of the executive, a 
model presented everywhere in advertising, films, mass literature: bright 
eyes, broad shoulders, lithe muscles and a sports car. This athletic model 
also encompasses sexual athleticism: the high-ranking executive of the Le 
Monde small ads is also Playboy man. But in the end, however much of a 



The body 


137 


part is played by the masculine model 9 or the transitional, hermaphro- 
ditic models, the 'young' forming a kind of third sex, the site of a 
'polymorphous, perverse sexuality '), 10 it is woman who orchestrates or 
rather around whom is orchestrated this great Aesthetic/ Erotic Myth. We 
have to find an explanation for this which is not simply of the archetypal 
sort along the lines: 'Sexuality is the sphere of Woman because she 
represents Nature, etc.' Admittedly, in the historical era we are dealing 
with here, woman has been confused with maleficent sexuality and 
condemned as such. But that moral/ sexual condemnation is entirely 
underpinned by a social servitude: woman and the body have shared 
the same servitude, the same relegation, throughout Western history, The 
sexual definition of woman is historical in origin: the repression of 
the body and the exploitation of woman were carried out in the same 
spirit, every exploited (and therefore threatening) category having auto- 
matically to assume a sexual definition. Blacks are 'sexualized' for the 
same reason, not because they might be said to be 'closer to Nature', but 
because they are exploited and kept in serfdom. The repressed, sub- 
limated sexuality of a whole civilization inevitably combines with the 
category whose social repression and subjection form the very basis of 
that culture. 

Now, just as women and bodies were bound together in servitude, the 
emancipation of woman and the emancipation of the body are logically 
and historically linked (for related reasons, the emancipation of the 
young is contemporaneous with them). But we can see that this simul- 
taneous emancipation occurs without the basic ideological confusion between 
woman and sexuality being removed - the legacy of puritanism still bears 
down on us with all its force. Indeed, only now does it assume its full 
scope since women, once subjugated as a sex, are today 'liberated' as a 
sex - to the extent that we see this almost irreversible confusion now 
deepening in all its forms, since it is in so far as she ' liberates ' herself that 
woman becomes more and more merged with her body. But we have seen in 
what conditions this takes place: it is, in fact, the apparently liberated 
woman who merges with the apparently liberated body. We may say 
both of women and the body - as we may say of young people and 
all the categories whose emancipation constitutes the leitmotiv of mod- 
ern democratic society - that all the things in whose name they are 
'emancipated' (sexual freedom, eroticism, play, etc.) form themselves 
into systems of 'tutelary' values, 'irresponsible' values, simultaneously 
orientating consumer behaviour and behaviours of social relegation, with 
the very exaltation and excess of honour that surrounds them standing in 
the way of real economic and social responsibility. 

Women, young people and the body - the emergence of all of which 
after thousands of years of servitude and forgetting in effect consti- 
tutes the most revolutionary potentiality - and, therefore, the most 
fundamental risk for any social order whatever - are integrated and 
recuperated as a 'myth of emancipation'. Women are given Woman to 



138 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


consume, the young are given the Young and, in this formal and 
narcissistic emancipation, their real liberation is successfully averted. Or 
alternatively, by assigning Revolt to the Young ('Young = revolt'), two 
birds are killed with one stone: the revolt diffusely present throughout 
society is conjured away by allotting it to a particular category and that 
category is neutralized by confining it to a particular role - revolt. An 
admirable vicious circle of managed 'emancipation', which we also find 
applied in the case of women: by confusing women and sexual libera- 
tion, each is neutralized by the other. Women 'consume themselves' 
through sexual liberation, and sexual liberation 'is consumed' through 
women. There is no play on words here. One of the basic mechanisms of 
consumption is this formal autonomization of groups, classes and castes 
(and the individual) by and through the formal autonomization of 
systems of signs or roles. 

There is no question here of denying the 'real' development of the 
status of women and young people as social categories: they are in fact 
freer; they vote, have rights, work more and work earlier. Similarly, it 
would be pointless to deny the objective importance now accorded to the 
body, to the care of it and its pleasures, to the 'added element of body 
and sexuality' which the average individual enjoys today. We are far 
from the 'ideal release' Rimbaud spoke of, but let us accept, nonetheless, 
that there is in all this a greater freedom of manoeuvre for, and a greater 
positive integration of, women and young people, and bodily problems. 
What we are saying is that this relative, concrete emancipation, because 
it is merely the emancipation of women, young people and the body as 
categories immediately indexed to a functional practice, is accompanied 
by a mythical transcendence or, rather, itself divides to produce a 
mythical transcendence, an objectivization as myth. The emancipation of 
some women (and - why not? - the relative emancipation of all) is 
merely to some extent the secondary gain, the spin-off from - and the 
cover for - that immense strategic operation which consists in containing 
in the idea of woman and her body the zvhole social peril of sexual liberation, in 
confining the peril of women's liberation to the idea of sexual liberation 
(in eroticism), in calling down on to the Woman/Object all the perils of 
the social liberation of women . 11 


The Medical Cult: 'Fitness' 

The predominant relation to health is derived from the current way of 
relating to the body, which is not so much a relation to one's own body 
as to the functional, 'personalized' body. When it is mediated by an 
instrumental representation of the body, that relation can be defined as a 
general function of maintaining the body's equilibrium. When mediated 
by a representation of the body as prestige good, it becomes a functional 
status demand. It then enters into a competitive logic and expresses itself 



The body 


139 


in a virtually unlimited demand for medical, surgical and pharmaceut- 
ical services - a compulsive demand linked to the narcissistic investment 
of the body/ (part) object and a status demand linked to the processes of 
personalization and social mobility; a demand which, at any event, bears 
only a distant relation to that 'right to health' which is a modernist 
extension of human rights, complementary to the rights to liberty and 
property. Health today is not so much a biological imperative linked to 
survival as a social imperative linked to status. It is not so much a basic 
'value' as a form of prestige display. In the mystique of such display, 
fitness stands next to beauty. Their signs are exchanged within the 
framework of personalization, that anxious, perfectionist manipulation 
of the sign function of the body. This corporeal syndrome of display, 
which links narcissism and social prestige, can also be very clearly seen 
in inverted form in the current very widespread fact, which must be 
regarded as one of the essential elements of modern ethics, that any 
loss of prestige, any social or psychological reversal is immediately 
somatized. 

It is, therefore, superficial to claim that the use of medicine (usage of 
doctors) has been 'desacralized' and that because people go more often 
and more freely to their doctors, because they use and abuse this 
democratized social provision in a complex-free way (which is not true), 
they are coming closer to an 'objective' practice of health and medicine. 
'Democratically consumed' medicine has lost nothing of its sacredness 
and its magical functionality. But it is clearly not that traditional func- 
tionality which attached, through the person of the priest-healer, the 
sorcerer and the medicine-man, to operation on the practical body, on the 
instrumental body threatened by outside hazards, such as still figures in 
the 'uncultivated' peasant vision, in which the body is not interiorized as 
a personal, 'personalized' value. In that vision, one does not achieve 
one's salvation or mark one's status through one's body. It is, rather, a 
tool of one's labour and mana, that is to say, efficient force. If it gets out 
of sorts, the doctor restores the body's mana. This type of magic and the 
corresponding status of the doctor is tending to disappear. But it is not 
giving way, in the modern 'vision', to an objective representation of the 
body. It is giving way to two complementary modalities: narcissistic 
investment and prestige display: a 'psychical' dimension and a status 
dimension. It is in these two directions that the status of the doctor and 
of health is being reworked. And it is only now, through the 'rediscovery' 
and the individual sacralization of the body, that medicality is assuming its 
full scope (just as it was only with the mythic crystallization of the 
'individual soul' that clericality as a transcendent institution really took 
off). 

Primitive 'religions' know no 'sacrament'; they are collective practices. 
It was with the individualization of the principles of salvation (mainly in 
Christian spirituality) that sacraments and the 'officiants' in charge of 



140 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


them were established. It was with the even more thoroughgoing indi- 
vidualization of conscience that individual confession, the sacrament par 
excellence, was instituted. Making all due allowance and wholly aware of 
the dangers of the comparison, it seems to me to be the same with the 
body and medicine: it is with generalized individual 'somatization' (in 
the broadest, non-clinical sense of the term), with the body's becoming 
an object of prestige and salvation and a fundamental value, that the 
doctor becomes a 'confessor', a 'source of absolution' and an 'officiant', 
and the medical profession settles into the overprivileged social status 
which it currently enjoys. 

All kinds of sacrificial behaviours of auto-solicitude and malign exor- 
cism, of gratification and repression, converge more than ever on the 
privatized, personalized body - a whole host of secondary, 'irrational' 
purchases to no practical, therapeutic end. Much of this is consumption 
which even transgresses economic imperatives (half of the money spent 
on medicines is on non-prescription items, and this goes even for those 
covered by the welfare system). What prompts such behaviour other 
than the deep-seated belief that it has to cost you something (and it is 
enough that it costs you something) for health to be yours in exchange ? 
This is ritual, sacrificial consumption rather than medication. Thus we 
see a compulsive demand for medicines among the 'lower' classes and a 
demand for the doctor among the better-off, but whether the doctor is 
seen by the former as a dispenser of material signs and goods or by the 
latter more as the 'psychoanalyst of the body', medicine and doctors 
have a cultural virtue rather than a therapeutic function, and they are 
consumed as 'virtual' mana. And that consumption takes place accord- 
ing to a thoroughly modern ethics which, by contrast with the traditional 
form, which demanded that the body should serve, enjoins all individuals 
to put themselves in the service of their own bodies (cf. the Elle article). One 
has a duty to take care of oneself as one has to cultivate one's mind: it is, 
in a sense, a mark of respectability The modern woman is both the vestal 
and the manager of her own body; she takes care to keep it beautiful and 
competitive. The functional and the sacred are inextricably intermingled 
here. And the doctor .receives both the respect due to the expert and the 
reverence due to the priest. 


The Obsession with Slimness: The 'Figure' 

The obsession with looking after one's figure can be understood in terms 
of the same categorical imperative. There is in no sense, of course, any 
natural affinity between beauty and slimness (one only has to glance at 
other cultures to see this). Fat and obesity have also been regarded as 
beautiful in other places and at other times. But this imperative, uni- 
versal, democratic beauty inscribed as a right and a duty on the 
pediment of consumer society, is indissociable from slimness. Beauty cannot 



The body 


141 


be fat or slim, heavy-limbed or slender as it could in a traditional 
definition based on the harmony of forms. It can only be slim and slender, 
according to its current definition as a combinatorial logic of signs, 
governed by the same algebraic economy as the functionality of objects 
or the elegance of a diagram. It even tends, somewhat, towards the 
scrawny and emaciated, on the lines of the models and mannequins that 
are simultaneously the negation of the flesh and the exaltation of 
fashion. 

This may seem a strange state of affairs, for if we take as one definition 
of consumption that it is a generalization of the combinatorial processes 
of fashion, we know that fashion can play on anything, on opposite 
terms: it can play without distinction on the old and the new, the 
'beautiful' and the 'ugly' (in their classical definitions), the moral and the 
immoral. But it cannot play on the fat and the thin. There is something akin 
to an absolute limit here. Might it be that in a society of overconsumption 
(of food), slenderness becomes a distinctive sign in itself? Even if 
slimness acts as such a sign in relation to all previous cultures and 
generations and to the peasant and 'lower' classes, we know there are no 
signs which are distinctive in themselves, but only opposing formal signs 
(old and new, long and short (skirts), etc.) which follow one upon the other 
as distinctive signs, and alternate in such a way as to bring fresh grist to 
the mill, without any one of these definitively squeezing out the other. 
Now, paradoxically, in the area of the 'figure', an area which is par 
excellence that of fashion, the fashion cycle no longer operates. There has 
to be something more fundamental than distinction. Something which 
must be linked to the very mode of complicity with our own bodies 
which we have seen being established in the contemporary era. 

The 'liberation' of the body has the effect of constituting it as an object 
of solicitude. Now that solicitude, like everything which has to do with 
the body and the relation to the body, is ambivalent. It is never solely 
positive and overall, indeed, it is negative. The body is always 'liberated' 
as simultaneous object of this dual solicitude . 12 As a consequence, the 
immense process of solicitude of the 'gratifying' kind, a process we have 
described as the instituting of the body in its modern form, is accom- 
panied by an equal and equally substantial investment of repressive 
solicitude. 

It is this repressive solicitude which is expressed in all the modern 
collective obsessions relating to the body. Hygiene, in all its forms, with 
its fantasies of sterility, asepsis, prophylaxis or, by contrast, of promis- 
cuity, contamination, pollution - tending to conjure away the 'organic' 
body and, in particular, the functions of excretion and secretion - aims at 
a negative definition of the body, by elimination, as though it were a 
smooth, faultless, sexless object, cut off from all external aggression and 
thereby protected from itself. The obsession with hygiene is not, how- 
ever, the direct heir to puritan morality. That morality denied, reproved 
and repressed the body. In a more subtle way, contemporary ethics 



142 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


sanctifies it in its hygienic abstraction, in all its purity as a disincarnated 
signifier. But a signifier of what? Of forgotten, censored desire. This is 
why the (phobic, obsessional) hygienic compulsion is never far away. 
Overall, however, the preoccupation with hygiene founds a morality 
based not on pathos, but on play: it 'eludes' deep fantasies in favour of a 
superficial, cutaneous religion of the body. Taking care of, being 'loving' 
towards the body, that morality prevents any collusion between the body 
and desire. It is closer, all in all, to the sacrificial techniques of 'prepara- 
tion' of the body, to the ludic techniques of control - not repression - of 
primitive societies, than it is to the repressive ethics of the puritan era. 

Much more than in hygiene, it is in the ascetic practice of 'dieting' that 
the aggressive drive against the body is to be seen, a drive 'liberated' at 
the same time as the body itself. Ancient societies had their ritual fasting 
practices. As collective practices linked to the celebration of festivals 
(before or after - fasting before Communion - fasting in Advent - Lent 
after Mardi Gras), it was their function to siphon off all this diffuse 
aggressive drive against the body (the whole ambivalence of the relation 
to food and 'consumption') and channel it into collective observance. 
Now, these various institutions of fasting and mortification have fallen 
into disuse as so many archaisms incompatible with the total, democratic 
liberation of the body. Clearly, our consumer society can no longer bear 
any restrictive norm and even excludes such a norm on principle. 
However, in liberating the body in all its potentialities for satisfaction, it 
thought it was liberating a naturally pre-existing harmonious relation- 
ship between man and his body. It turns out that this was a fantastic 
mistake. The whole antagonistic aggressive drive liberated at the same 
time, now no longer canalized by social institutions, surges back today 
into the very heart of the universal solicitude for the body. It is that drive 
which fuels the veritable enterprise of self-repression now affecting one- 
third of the adult populations of the overdeveloped countries (and 50 per 
cent of women; an American study has shown that 300 adolescent girls 
out of 446 are on a diet). It is this drive which, above and beyond 
the (once again undeniable) determinations of fashion, is stoking up 
this irrepressible, irrational self-destructive frenzy in which beauty and 
elegance, which were the original goals, are now merely alibis for a daily, 
obsessive disciplinary exercise. In a total turnabout, the body becomes 
that menacing object which has to be watched over, reduced and 
mortified for 'aesthetic' ends, while one's eyes are kept riveted through- 
out on the skinny, emaciated models of Vogue, in whom one can decipher 
all the inverted aggressiveness of an affluent society towards its own 
body triumphalism, all the vehement denial of its own principles. 

This meeting of beauty and repression in the cult of the figure (in 
which the body, in its materiality and sexuality, basically has no part any 
more, simply functioning now as the physical medium for two logics 
wholly removed from the logic of satisfaction: the fashion imperative, a 
principle of social organization, and the death imperative, a principle of 



The body 


143 


psychical organization) is one of the great paradoxes of our 'civilization'. 
The mystique of the 'figure' and the fascination with slimness have such 
a profound impact only because they are forms of violence, because in 
them the body is literally sacrificed - both fixed in its perfection and 
violently vitalized as in sacrifice. All the contradictions of this society are 
encapsulated here, at the level of the body. 'With its remarkable action', 
Scandi-Sauna will bring you a slimmer waistline - better hips, thighs and 
ankles - a flat stomach - regenerated tissues - firmed-up flesh - smooth 
skin - a new figure. 'After three months of using Scandi-Sauna ... I lost 
those extra pounds and, at the same time, acquired remarkable physical 
fitness and mental harmony.' In the USA, 'low-calorie foods', artificial 
sweeteners, fat-free butters and diets launched with great advertising 
campaigns make fortunes for their backers and manufacturers. It is 
estimated that 30 million Americans either are, or believe themselves to 
be, obese. 


The Sex-Exchange Standard 

Automatic sexualization of everyday essentials: 'Whether the article to 
be pitched out into commercial space is a brand of tyres or a new model 
of coffin, the aim is always to hit the potential client in the same spot: 
below the belt. Eroticism for the elite; pornography for the masses' 
(Jacques Sternberg, Toi ma nuit, Losfeld). 

Naked theatre (Broadway: Oh Calcutta!): the authorities licensed the 
performances on condition that there were neither erections nor penetra- 
tion on stage. 

First pornography fair at Copenhagen - 'Sex 69': this was a 'fair' and not 
a festival, as the newspapers had reported. In other words, it was 
essentially a commercial event, designed to enable the manufacturers 
of pornographic material to conquer new markets. It seems that the 
Christiansborg leaders, 13 generously concerned to remove all mystery 
from this field - and, hence, much of its attraction - by bringing down 
the barriers, had underestimated the financial side of the business. A 
number of smart people, on the lookout for profitable investments, were 
not slow to grasp what an opportunity the intensive exploitation of this 
sector could represent for them, now that it was part of the open market. 
Having rapidly organized themselves, they are now, as a consequence, 
developing pornography into one of Denmark's most profitable indus- 
tries (source: the press). 

Not a millimetre of erogenous zone has been left unexploited (J.-F. Held). 
The talk everywhere is of 'sexual explosion', of the 'escalation of eroti- 
cism'. Sexuality is 'at the forefront' of consumer society, spectacularly 
overdetermining the entire signifying field of mass communications. All 
that is presented there has about it a conspicuous sexual vibrato. 



144 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


Everything offered for consumption has a sexual coefficient. At the same 
time, of course, it is sexuality itself which is offered for consumption. Here 
again we have the same operation as we adverted to with regard to 
youth and revolt, women and sexuality: by indexing sexuality in an 
increasingly systematic way to commercialized and industrialized ob- 
jects and messages, these latter are diverted from their objective ration- 
ality, while sexuality itself is diverted from its explosive finality. Social 
and sexual change thus tread well-beaten paths which have already been 
carefully explored by 'cultural' and promotional eroticism. 

Admittedly, this explosion, this proliferation is contemporaneous with 
deep changes in the relations between the sexes and in individual 
relations to the body and sex. It is, even more, an expression of the real - 
and in many respects new-found - urgency of sexual problems. But it is 
not certain either that this sexual 'display' of modern society is not a 
gigantic cover for these very problems, or that, by giving them system- 
atic 'official status', it does not lend them a deceptive appearance of 
'freedom', which masks the profound contradictions involved. 

We can sense that this eroticization is excessive and that there is 
meaning in the excessiveness. Is it merely the expression of a crisis of 
desublimation, of a relaxation of traditional taboos? In that case, we 
might imagine that once a certain saturation level had been reached, 
once the cravings of the heirs of puritanism had been satisfied, liberated 
sexuality would recover its equilibrium, having now detached itself, and 
achieved its independence, from the productivist, industrial spiral. One 
might also take the view that the escalation, once begun, will continue 
like that of GNP, the conquest of space or innovation in fashion and 
objects, and for the same reasons (J.-F, Held). In this perspective, sexuality 
is once and for all part of the unlimited process of production and marginal 
differentiation, because it is the very logic of that system which has 
'liberated' it as erotic system and individual and collective consumption 
function. 

Let us distance ourselves here from any kind of moral censorship: we 
are not speaking of 'corruption' and we know, in any case, that the worst 
sexual 'corruption' may be a sign of vitality, richness, emancipation: it is, 
in that case, revolutionary and marks the historical flowering of a new 
class conscious of its triumph. The Italian Renaissance was an age of this 
kind. Such sexuality is a mark of rejoicing. However, it is not this 
sexuality, but its spectre which resurfaces - as a sign of death - when a 
society is in decline. The decomposition of a class or a society always 
ends in the individual dispersal of its members and (among other things) 
in a veritable contagion of sexuality, both as individual motive and as 
social ambience. The end of the ancien regime was one such period. It 
seems that a seriously splintered collectivity, because it is cut off from its 
past and lacks any imagining of a future, re-enters an almost pure world 
of drives, mingling in the same feverish dissatisfaction the immediate 
determinations of profit and sex. The disturbance of social relations, and 



The body 


145 


the precarious collusion and ferocious competition which create the 
ambience of the economic world, affect the nerves and the senses. 
Sexuality, ceasing to be a factor of cohesion and shared elation, becomes 
an individual frenzy for profit. Everyone is obsessed with it and thereby 
isolated. And, in a characteristic feature, as it is exacerbated, it also 
becomes anxious about itself. It is no longer shame, modesty or guilt, 
those marks of the centuries of puritanism, which weigh upon it: indeed, 
these gradually vanish as the official norms and prohibitions disappear. 
It is the individual agency of repression, internalized censorship, which 
penalizes this sexual liberation. Censorship is no longer socially insti- 
tuted (religiously, morally, juridically) in formal opposition to sexuality; 
it now plunges deep into the individual unconscious and feeds on the 
same sources as sexuality. All the sexual gratifications which surround 
one now bear within them their own continual censorship. There is no 
longer any repression (or there is less); but censorship has become a 
function of everyday life. 

'Nous implanterons une debauche inouie' said Rimbaud in his 
'Villes '! 4 But sexual liberation and the escalation of eroticism have 
nothing to do with the 'derangement of all the senses' [ dereglement de tons 
les se;;s ]. 15 The orchestrated derangement and muted anxiety with which 
it is imbued, far from 'changing life', merely make up a collective 
ambience in which sexuality in fact becomes a private affair, that is to say, 
one that is fiercely self-conscious, narcissistic and tired of itself - the very 
ideology of a system which it crowns in terms of mores and in which it 
is a political cog. For, above and beyond the advertisers, who 'play' the 
sexuality 'card' so as to sell more products, there is the existing social 
order, which 'plays the card of' sexual liberation (even if it condemns it 
morally) against the threatening dialectic of the totality. 


Symbols and Fantasies in Advertising 

This generalized censorship which defines consumed sexuality must not, 
above all, be confused with moral censorship. It does not penalize 
conscious sexual behaviours in the name of conscious imperatives. This 
is, indeed, a field in which apparent permissiveness is de rigueur; 
everything conspires towards it and even the perversions can be freely 
engaged in (these things are all relative, of course, but this is the general 
trend). The censorship which our society, in its sexual hyperaesthesia, 
sets in place is more subtle: it operates at the level of fantasies themselves 
and the symbolic function. This kind of censorship is unaffected by the 
campaigning measures used against traditional censorship: to use those 
today is to fight an enemy that is past and gone. And the weapons of the 
(still virulent) puritan forces, with their censorship and morality, are 
outdated too. The basic process is going on elsewhere, not at the 
conscious and manifest level of the seductive artifices - for good or ill - 



146 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


of sex. There is a terrible naivety about this, among both the decriers of 
sexual liberty and its defenders, on the right and on the left. 

Let us take an example from an advertisement for Henriot champagne 
(J.-F. Held). 

A bottle and a rose. The rose flushes with colour, begins to open, approaches 
the screen, swells, becomes tumescent. The amplified sound of a beating heart 
fills the cinema, accelerates, grows fevered, wild. The cork begins to rise from 
the bottle slowly, inexorably. It grows in size, moves towards the camera, its 
brass binding wires breaking one after another. The heart beats and beats, the 
rose swells, the cork again - ah, and suddenly the heart stops, the cork flies off 
and the foaming champagne bubbles out over the neck of the bottle, the rose 
grows pale and closes, the tension subsides. 

Let us recall also that advertisement for bathroom installations in which, 
with a great many contortions - and in ever greater close-up - a vamp 
simulates a mounting orgasm with taps and pipes and a whole battery of 
phallic, spermatic devices. And the thousands of similar examples in 
which there is all-out 'hidden persuasion' - so-called - that persuasion 
which 'so dangerously' manipulates our 'drives and fantasies' and no 
doubt has more impact in intellectual circles than on the imagination of 
consumers. Erotic advertising, so obsessive and guilt-inducing, stirs up 
such profound emotions in us. A naked blonde with black braces 
appears and, hey presto, the braces manufacturer is rich. And even 
though he points out that 'you only have to raise the most harmless 
umbrella towards the sky to turn it into a phallic symbol'. Held does not 
question either the fact of its being a symbol, or the effectiveness of that 
symbol as such on effective demand. Further on, he compares two 
advertising projects for Weber lingerie: the manufacturers chose the first 
of these and they were right, he says, because, in the other, the 

swooning young man looks almost as though he has been slain. For women, 
the temptation to be dominant is great . . . but it is also a frightening 
temptation ... If the sphinx- woman and her victim had become Weber's brand 
image, the ambiguous guilt of their possible clients would have been so great 
that they would have chosen less compromising brassieres. 

And so the analysts, all deliciously a-quiver, will turn their learned 
attentions to the fantasies in advertising, to the devouring orality in 
them, the anality or the phallic symbols - all these things directly 
plumbed into the consumer's unconscious, which was simply ready and 
waiting to be manipulated (that unconscious is, of course, assumed to be 
already there and given in advance, since Freud said so - a hidden 
essence, whose preferred fare is the symbol or the fantasy). There is the 
same vicious circularity between the unconscious and fantasies as there 
once was between subject and object at the level of consciousness. An 
unconscious stereotyped as an individual function and fantasies 
delivered as finished products by advertising agencies are indexed one 
to the other, defined one by the other. This is to elude all the real 
problems posed by the logic of the unconscious and the symbolic 
function by spectacularly materializing them in a mechanical process of 



The body 


147 


signification and the efficacity of signs: 'There is the unconscious and 
then there are the fantasies which lock into it, and this miraculous 
combination sells products.' There is the same naivety here as among the 
ethnologists who believed the myths related to them by native peoples 
and took them literally, along with the superstitious belief of those 
peoples in the magical efficacy of their myths and rites - all of which was 
done to maintain the ethnologists' own rationalist myth of the 'primitive 
mentality'. There are beginning to be doubts about the direct impact of 
advertising on sales. It is perhaps also time to cast equally radical doubt 
on this naive fantasmic mechanics - which serves as an alibi for both 
advertisers and analysts. 

Crudely put, the question is this: is there really any libido in all this? 
What is there that is sexual, libidinal in the eroticism deployed? Is 
advertising (and are the other mass-media systems) a genuine 'scene' of 
fantasy? Is this manifest symbolic, fantasy content ultimately to be taken 
any more literally than the manifest content of dreams? And is the erotic 
injunction ultimately any more valid or symbolically effective than the 
direct commercial injunction is in the marketplace? What is really going 
on here? 

In reality, one is faced with a mythology at one remove, which strives 
to pass off as fantasy what is merely fantasmagoria, to entrap individuals, 
by way of a rigged symbolics, with the myth of their individual uncon- 
scious, to make them invest it as a consumer function. People have to 
believe that they 'have' an unconscious, that that unconscious is there, 
projected into and objectivized in the 'erotic' symbolism of advertising, 
which serves as a proof that it exists, that they are right to believe in it 
and therefore to wish to come to terms with it, first at the level of the 
'reading' of symbols, then by the acquisition of the goods designated by 
those symbols and supporting those 'fantasies'. 

There are, in fact, neither symbols nor fantasies in this whole erotic 
shebang, and it is tilting at windmills to describe all this as a 'strategy of 
desire'. Even when there is not irony in the phallic or other messages, 
when they are not conveyed in an openly playful way, 'with a nod and a 
wink', we may safely take it that all the erotic material surrounding us is 
entirely culturalized. It is neither fantasmic nor symbolic material, but 
simply atmospheric. It is neither Desire nor the Unconscious speaking, but 
the psychoanalytic culture, or rather subculture, which has become banal 
and commonplace, has passed into ordinary commercial parlance. It is 
second-level affabulation; strictly speaking, it is allegory. Id (the Uncon- 
scious) does not speak there; what does speak merely refers on to 
psychoanalysis as it is established, integrated and 'recuperated' today in 
the cultural system. And it certainly does not refer to psychoanalysis as 
analytic practice, but to the sign function of psychoanalysis, as some- 
thing culturalized, aestheticized, mass-mediafied. At any event, one 
should not confuse a formal and allegorical combinatory of mytho- 
logized themes with the discourse of the Unconscious, any more than the 



148 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


artificial log fire should be confused with the symbol of fire. There is no 
relation between that 'signified' fire and the poetic substance of fire 
analysed by Bachelard. That log fire is a cultural sign and nothing more; 
it has value merely as a cultural reference. Thus, the whole of advertising 
and modern erotics are made up of signs, not of meaning. 

One must not be taken in by the escalation of the erotic in advertising 
(any more than by the escalation of 'irony', the play, the distancing and 
the 'counter-advertising' which, significantly, go along with it): all these 
contents are merely juxtaposed signs, all of which culminate in the 
super-sign that is the brand name, which is the only real message. 
Nowhere is there language - and certainly not the language of the 
Unconscious. This is why the 50 female bottoms priggishly arrayed by 
Airborne in its recent advert ('Ah, yes. They're all there . . . this is where 
we do all our initial research, examining every angle . . . for we believe, 
with Mme de Sevigne . . .', etc.) can be shown - and many others too. 
They don't offend against anything, nor do they awaken anything 'deep 
within us'. They are merely cultural connotations, a metalanguage of 
connotations: they speak the sexualist myth of a culture that is 'with-it'; 
they have nothing to do with real anality, which is precisely why they are 
inoffensive, and immediately consumable as images. 

The real fantasy is not representable. If it could be represented, it would 
be unbearable. The advertisement for Gillette razor-blades showing two 
velvety female lips framed by a razor blade can only be viewed because 
it does not really express the - unbearable - fantasy of the castrating 
vagina to which it 'alludes', and because it is content simply to combine 
together signs emptied of their syntax, isolated signs, itemized signs, 
which trigger no unconscious associations (and which indeed system- 
atically evade these), only 'cultural' ones. This is the Madame Tussaud's 
of symbols, a petrified forest of fantasies/ signs which no longer have in 
them anything of the ivork of the drives. 

All in all, then, to denounce advertising for its manipulation of the 
emotions is to pay it too great a compliment. But this gigantic mystifica- 
tion, in which both censors and defenders willingly collude, doubtless 
has a very precise function, which is to deflect attention from the real 
process, that is to say from the radical analysis of the processes of 
censorship which 'operate' very effectively underneath all this fantasma- 
goria. The real conditioning we are subjected to by the machinery of 
erotic advertising is not some 'deep-level' persuasion or unconscious 
suggestion, but rather the censorship of the deep meaning, the symbolic 
function, the fantasmic expression in an articulated syntax - in short, the 
censorship of the living emanation of sexual signifiers. All this is blotted 
out, censored, abolished in a codified play of sexual signs, in the opaque 
obviousness of the sexual that is deployed on all sides, in which the 
subtle destructuring of syntax leaves place only for a closed, tautological 
manipulation. It is in this systematic terrorism, which operates at the 
level of signification itself, that all sexuality empties itself of its substance 



The body 


149 


and becomes material for consumption. It is here that the 'process' of 
consumption takes place, and this is of quite a different order of 
seriousness from naive exhibitionism, fairground phallicism and knock- 
about Freudianism. 

The Sexed Doll 

The sexed doll is a new toy. But the toys directed at children on the basis 
of adult fantasies implicate the whole of a civilization. This new doll 
attests to the general nature of our relation to sex in consumer society 
which, like our relation to everything else, is governed by a process of 
simulation and restoration. The driving principle of this is an artificial mad 
desire [vertige] for realism: sexuality is confused, in this case, with the 
'objective' reality of the sexual organs. 

If we look closely, it is the same with colour in television, with nudity 
in advertising or elsewhere, as it is in participation in the factories or the 
'organic and active' participation of spectators in the 'total' spectacle of 
avant-garde theatre: everywhere we find an effort artificially to restore a 
'truth' or a 'totality', systematically to restore a totality on the basis of the 
prior division of labour or functions. 

In the case of the sexed doll (the equivalent of sex as toy, as infantile 
manipulation), we must first have split off sexuality as totality, in its 
symbolic total exchange function, in order to be able to contain it in 
sexual signs (genitals, nudity, secondary sexual characteristics, the gener- 
alized erotic signification of all objects) and to assign these to the individual 
as private property or as attributes. 

The 'traditional' doll fully performed its symbolic (and thus also 
sexual) function. To deck it out with a specific sexual sign is, in a sense, 
to strike out that symbolic function and to confine the object to a 
spectacular function. This is not a special case: this sex added to the doll as 
secondary attribute, as sexual affabulation and, in fact, as censorship of 
the symbolic function is the equivalent, at the level of the child, of the 
nudist and erotic affabulation, of that glorification of the signs of the 
body which surrounds us on all sides. 

Sexuality is a total, symbolic structure of exchange: 

1 It is deposed from its symbolic function by substituting for it the realistic, 
manifest, spectacular significations of sex and 'sexual needs'. 

2 It is deposed from its exchange function (this is fundamental) by indi- 
vidualizing Eros, by assigning the sex to the individual and the 
individual to the sex. This is the culmination of the technical and 
social division of labour. Sex becomes a fragmented function and, in 
the same process, is allotted to the individual as 'private' property (as 
also occurs with the Unconscious). 

We can see that one thing is going on here and one alone: the denial of 
sexuality as symbolic exchange or, in other words, as total process 



150 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


beyond functional division (that is to say, the denial of sexuality as 
subversive). 

Once its total, symbolic exchange function has been deconstructed and 
lost, sexuality collapses into the dual use-value/exchange-value schema 
(which two aspects are together characteristic of the notion of object). It is 
objectivized as a separate function, both: 

1 use-value for the individual (by way of his/her own sex, 'sexual 
technique' and 'sexual needs', for in this case, it is a matter of 
technique and needs, not of desire); 

2 exchange-value (though this is no longer symbolic, but either eco- 
nomic and commodity-based - prostitution in all its forms - or, as is 
much more significant today, conspicuous sign-value - 'sexual 
status'). 

It is this whole story which is told by the sexed doll in its guise as 
'progressive' toy. Like the naked female rump thrown in as a bonus in an 
advert for record players or Air India, this dollish sex is a logical 
aberration. It is as grotesque as a brassiere on a pre-pubescent girl (a 
thing you can see on beaches). And, though in appearance opposite to 
that, it has the same meaning. The one veils, the other 'unveils', but the 
two are equally affected, and equally puritanical. In each case, there is a 
censorship operating through the artifact, through the conspicuous simula- 
tion which is always based on a metaphysics of realism - the real here being 
the reified and the opposite of the true. 

The more signs/attributes of the real are added and the more the 
artifact is perfected, the more is truth censored by diverting the symbolic 
charge towards the cultural metaphysics of reified sex. Everything will 
now be artificially sexualized in this way (not just dolls), the better to 
exorcise the libidinal dimension and the symbolic function. But this 
particular case is an admirable one, for here it is the parents who, in good 
faith(?) and on the pretext of sexual education, carry out a veritable 
castration on the child by the over-exhibition of sexual signs where they 
have no place at all. 



9 


The Drama of Leisure or the 
Impossibility of Wasting One's Time 


In the real or imagined abundance of the 'consumer society'. Time 
occupies something of a privileged place. The demand for that very 
special kind of good equals the demand for almost all the others taken 
together. There is, of course, no more an equality of opportunity - or 
democracy - of free time than there is of other goods and services. 
Moreover, we know that, though it has some significance between 
periods or between cultures, the accounting of free time in chronometric 
units is not at all meaningful for us as an absolute value: the quality of 
that free time, its rhythm and its contents, and whether it is residual to 
the demands of work or 'autonomous', are all things which make a 
difference between particular individuals, categories or classes. And 
even the excess of work and the lack of leisure can become the privilege 
of the manager or of the high-ranking official. In spite of these dis- 
parities, which would only assume their full meaning within a differ- 
ential theory of signs of status (of which 'consumed' free time is a part), 
the fact remains that time retains a particular mythic value for its 
equalizing of human conditions, a value which has been taken up again 
strongly and thematized in our own day in the concept of leisure time. 
The old adage that 'all men are equal before time and death', which once 
encapsulated in its entirety the demand for social justice, today lives on 
in the carefully tended myth that all are equal in leisure. 

Going harpoon fishing together and sharing the Samos wine created a deep 
sense of fellow-feeling. On the boat back, they realized that they knew each 
other only by their Christian names and, wishing to exchange addresses, 
discovered to their amazement that they worked in the same factory, the one 
as technical director, the other as nightwatchman. 

This delightful little fable, which sums up the entire ideology of the Club 
Mediterranee, involves several metaphysical postulates: 

1 Leisure is the realm of freedom. 

2 Every man is, by nature, in substance free and equal to others: he has 
only to be put back in a state of 'nature' to recover this substantial 
liberty, equality and fraternity. Thus, the Greek islands and the 
underwater depths are heirs to the ideals of the French Revolution. 

3 Time is an a priori, transcendent dimension, which pre-exists its 
contents. It is there waiting for you. If it is alienated and subjugated 
in work, then 'you don't have time.' When you are away from work 



152 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


or unconstrained, 'you have time.' As an absolute, inalienable dimen- 
sion, like air or water, in leisure it once again becomes everyone's 
private property. 

This last point is the key one: it hints at the fact that time might well be 
only the product of a certain culture and, more precisely, of a certain 
mode of production. In that case, it is necessarily subject to the same 
status as all the goods produced or available within the framework of 
that system of production: that of property, private or public, that of 
appropriation, that of the object, possessed and alienable, alienated or 
free, and, like all objects produced by that systematic mode, partaking of 
the reified abstraction of exchange-value. 

Of most objects, one can still say that they have a certain use-value, 
which is in theory dissociable from their exchange-value. But is this true 
of time? Where is the use-value that could be defined by some objective 
function or specific practice? For this is the exigency which lies at the 
bottom of 'free' time: that we restore to time its use-value, that we liberate it 
as an empty dimension to fill it with its individual freedom. Now, in our 
system, time can only be 'liberated' as object, as chronometric capital of 
years, hours, days, weeks, to be 'invested' by each person 'as he pleases'. 
It is already, therefore, no longer in fact 'free', since it is governed in its 
chronometry by the total abstraction which is that of the system of 
production. 

The demand underlying leisure is, therefore, an insolubly contra- 
dictory and truly desperate one. Its fervid hope for freedom attests to the 
power of the system of constraints which is nowhere so total, precisely, 
as at the level of time. 'When I speak of time, it is already gone,' said 
Apollinaire. Of leisure we may say that 'When you "have" time, it is no 
longer free.' And the contradiction here is not one of terms, but of 
substance. This is the tragic paradox of consumption. Everyone wants to 
put - believes he has put - his desire into every object possessed, 
consumed, and into every minute of free time, but from every object 
appropriated, from every satisfaction achieved, and from every 'avail- 
able' minute, the desire is already absent, necessarily absent. All that 
remains is consomme of desire. 

In primitive societies there is no time. The question of whether one 
'has' time or not has no meaning there. Time there is nothing but the 
rhythm of repeated collective activities (the ritual of work and of 
feasting). It cannot be dissociated from these activities and projected into 
the future, or planned and manipulated. It is not individual; it is the very 
rhythm of exchange which culminates in the act of feasting. There is no 
name for it; it merges with the verbs of exchanging, with the cycle of 
men and nature. It is, therefore, 'bound', but not constrained and this 
'binding' ( Gebundenheit ) does not stand opposed to some kind of 'free- 
dom'. It is properly symbolic, which is to say that it cannot be abstractly 



The drama of leisure 


153 


isolated. But to say 'time is symbolic' has no meaning: it simply does not 
exist there, any more than does money. 

The analogy between time and money is, on the other hand, funda- 
mental to the analysis of 'our' times and what the great significant break 
between working time and free time might imply. This is a crucial break 
since the basic options of consumer society are based upon it. 

'Time is money': this slogan etched in letters of fire on Remington 
typewriters is also written above the factory gates, and inscribed in the 
subjugated time of daily life, in the increasingly important notion of the 
'time-budget'. It even governs - and it is this which concerns us here - 
leisure and free time. And it is this slogan too which defines empty time 
and is etched on the beach sundials and over the entrances to the holiday 
villages. 

Time is a rare and precious commodity, subject to the laws of 
exchange-value. This is clearly true of working time, since it is bought 
and sold. But, increasingly, free time itself has to be directly or indirectly 
purchased before it can be 'consumed'. Norman Mailer has analysed the 
production calculation carried out on orange juice, delivered frozen or 
liquid (in a carton). The latter is dearer because the price includes the 
two minutes gained over preparing the frozen product: in this ivay, the 
consumer's oivnfree time is being sold to him. And there is logic in this, since 
'free' time is in fact time 'earned'; it is capital on which a return can be 
had, potential productive power, which has therefore to be bought if one 
is to have control of it. One could only be amazed or indignant at this if 
one still held to the naive hypothesis of a 'natural' time, ideally neutral 
and available to all. The idea, which is not at all absurd, that one might 
be able to put a shilling in a juke-box and 'buy back' two minutes' silence 
illustrates the same truth. 

Divisible, abstract, measured time thus becomes homogeneous with 
the exchange-value system: it forms part of that system on the same basis 
as any other object. As an object of temporal calculation, it can and must 
be exchanged against any other commodity (in particular, money). 
Moreover, the notion of time-as-object [la notion de temps/objet] is a 
reversible one: just as time is an object, so all produced objects can be 
considered as crystallized time - not just labour time in the calculation of 
their market value, but also leisure time, in so far as technical objects 
'save' time for those who use them and are sold on that basis. The 
washing machine is free time for the housewife, potential free time 
transformed into an object so as to be buyable and sellable (free time she 
may possibly take advantage of to watch TV and the adverts she can see 
there for washing machines!). 

This law of time as exchange-value and as productive force does not 
stop at leisure's doorstep, as though leisure miraculously escaped all the 
constraints that rule working time. The laws of the (production) system 
do not take holidays. On the roads, on the beaches, in the holiday 
villages - they everywhere continually reproduce time as productive force. 



154 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


The apparent division into working time and leisure time - the latter 
ushering in the transcendent sphere of liberty - is a myth. This grand 
opposition, which is increasingly fundamental at the lived level of 
consumer society, remains nonetheless a formal one. This gigantic 
orchestration of annual time into a 'solar year' and a 'social year', with 
the holidays as the solstice of private life and the beginning of spring as 
the solstice (or equinox) of collective life - this gigantic ebbing and 
flowing is a seasonal rhythm in appearance only. It is not a rhythm at all 
(a succession of natural moments of a cycle), but a functional mechanism. 
It is a single systematic process which splits two ways into working time 
and leisure time. We shall see that, as a function of this common objective 
logic, the norms and constraints which are those of working time are 
transferred to free time and its contents. 

Let us return, for a moment, to the specific ideology of leisure. Rest, 
relaxation, escape and distraction are, perhaps, 'needs': but they do not 
in themselves define the specific exigency of leisure, which is the 
consumption of time. Free time is, perhaps, the entire ludic activity one 
fills it up with, but it is, first of all, the freedom to waste one's time, and 
possibly even to 'kill' it, to expend it as pure loss (this is why it is 
insufficient to say that leisure is 'alienated' because it is merely the time 
necessary to reproduce labour power. The alienation of leisure is more 
profound: it does not relate to the direct subordination to working time, 
but is linked to the very impossibility of wasting one's time). 

The true use-value of time, the use-value which leisure desperately 
tries to restore, is that of being wasted . 1 The holidays are this quest for a 
time which one can waste in the full sense of the term, without that 
waste entering in its turn into a process of calculation, without that time 
being (at the same time) in some way 'earned'. In our system of 
production and productive forces, one can only earn one's time: this 
fatality weighs upon leisure as it does upon work. One can only 'exploit 
[faire-valoir] one's time', if only by making a spectacularly empty use of 
it. The free time of the holidays remains the private property of the 
holiday-maker: an object, a possession he has earned with the sweat of 
his brow over the year; it is something owned by him, possessed by him 
as he possesses his other objects - something he could not relinquish to 
give it or sacrifice it (as one does with objects in making gifts of them), to 
yield it back up to total availability, to that absence of time which would 
be true freedom. He is tethered to 'his' time as Prometheus was tethered 
to his rock, tethered to the Promethean myth of time as productive 
force. 

Sisyphus, Tantalus, Prometheus: all the existential myths of 'absurd 
freedom' are reasonably accurate representations of the holiday-maker in 
his setting, with all his desperate efforts to imitate 'vacation', gratuitous- 
ness, a total dispossession, a void, a loss of himself and of his time which 
he cannot achieve, being, as he is, an object caught up in a definitively 
objectivized dimension of time. 



The drama of leisure 


155 


We are in an age when men will never manage to waste enough time 
to be rid of the inevitability of spending their lives earning it. But you 
can't throw off time like underwear. You can no longer either kill it or 
waste it, any more than you can money since they are both the very 
expression of the exchange-value system. In the symbolic dimension, 
gold and money are excrement. It is the same with objectivized time. But 
it is, in fact, very rare - and logically impossible in the current system - 
for money or time to be restored to their 'archaic', sacrificial function of 
excrement. That would really be to deliver oneself of them in the 
symbolic mode. In the order based on calculation and capital, things are, 
in a sense, precisely the opposite way about: objectivized by it, and 
manipulated by it as exchange-value, it is we zvho have become the 
excrement of money, it is we who have become the excrement of time. 

Thus, everywhere, in spite of the fiction of freedom in leisure, 'free' 
time is logically impossible: there can only be constrained time. The time 
of consumption is that of production. It is so to the extent that it is only 
ever an 'escapist' parenthesis in the cycle of production. But, once again, 
this functional complementarity (variously shared out in the different 
social classes) is not its essential determination. Leisure is constrained in 
so far as, behind its apparent gratuitousness, it faithfully reproduces all 
the mental and practical constraints which are those of productive time 
and subjugated [asservi] daily life. 

It is not characterized by creative activities: creating, artistically or 
otherwise, is never a leisure activity. Leisure is generally characterized by 
regressive activities of a type pre-dating modern forms of work (potter- 
ing, handicrafts, collecting, fishing). The guiding model for free time is 
the only one experienced up to that point: the model of childhood. But 
there is confusion here between the childhood experience of freedom in 
play and the nostalgia for a stage of social development prior to the 
division of labour. In each of these cases, because the totality and 
spontaneity leisure seeks to restore come into being in a social time 
marked essentially by the modern division of labour, they take the 
objective form of escape and irresponsibility. Now, this irresponsibility 
in leisure is homologous with, and structurally complementary to, 
irresponsibility in work. 'Freedom' on the one hand, constraint on the 
other: the structure is, in fact, the same. 

It is the very fact of the functional division between the two great 
modalities of time which constitutes a system and makes leisure the very 
ideology of alienated labour. The dichotomy establishes the same lacks and 
the same contradictions on both sides. So, everywhere, we find in leisure 
and holidays the same eager moral and idealistic pursuit of accomplish- 
ment as in the sphere of work, the same ethics of pressured perform- 
ance. No more than consumption, to which it belongs entirely, is leisure 
a praxis of satisfaction. Or, at least, we may say that it is so only in 
appearance. In fact, the obsession with getting a tan, that bewildered 
whirl in which tourists 'do' Italy, Spain and all the art galleries, the 



156 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


gymnastics and nudity which are de rigueur under an obligatory sun and, 
most important of all, the smiles and unfailing joie de vivre all attest to the 
fact that the holiday-maker conforms in every detail to the principles of 
duty, sacrifice and asceticism. This is the Tun-morality' Riesman speaks 
of, that properly ethical dimension of salvation in leisure and pleasure 
which no one can now escape, except by finding their salvation in other 
criteria of accomplishment. 

The increasingly marked tendency towards the physical concentration 
of tourists and holiday-makers - which stands in formal contradiction to 
the declared motive of pursuing freedom and autonomy - obeys the 
same principle of constraint which is homologous with that experienced 
in work. Solitude is a value spoken about, but not practised. People flee 
work, but not physical concentration. Here again, of course, social 
discrimination plays its part (see Communications, 8). Sea, sand, sun and 
the presence of a crowd are much more necessary to holiday-makers at 
the bottom of the social scale than to the better-off. This is partly a 
question of financial resources, but, above all, it is one of cultural 
aspirations: 'Subjected to passive holidays, they need the sea, the sun 
and the crowd to feel as though they really are somebody' (Hubert Mace, 
in Communications, 10, 'Vacances et tourisme', 1967). 

'Leisure is a collective vocation.' This journalistic headline perfectly 
sums up the institutional character, the aspect of internalized social norm 
which free time and its consumption have assumed, in which the 
privilege of enjoying snow, idleness and cosmopolitan cuisine merely 
masks deep compliance with: 

1 a collective morality of maximization of needs and satisfactions, 
which reflects point by point in the private and 'free' sphere the 
principle of maximization of production and productive forces in the 
'social' sphere; 

2 a code of distinction, a structure of differentiation - the distinctive 
criterion, which for the well-to-do of earlier ages was 'idleness', 
having now become the 'consumption' of useless time. It is the 
constraint that one must do nothing (useful) which governs leisure - 
and does so very tyrannically - just as it governed the status of the 
privileged in traditional societies. 

Leisure, which is still very unequally distributed, remains, in our demo- 
cratic societies, a factor of cultural distinction and selection. We may, 
however, envisage this trend reversing itself (at least we may imagine 
this): in Aldous Huxley's Brave Neiv World, the Alphas are the only ones 
who work, the mass of the others being condemned to hedonism and 
leisure. We may admit that, with the progress of leisure, and the 
generalized 'promotion' of free time, there will be a reversal of this 
privilege and the great thing will be to set aside less and less time for 
obligator y consumption. If, as is probable, though it is the opposite of what 
are ideally their goals, leisure activities, as they develop, increasingly 



The drama of leisure 


157 


sink into competitiveness and the disciplinary ethic, then we may 
suppose that work (a certain type of work) will become the place and 
time in which to recover from one's leisure. And work can even now be 
a mark of distinction and privilege once again, as is the case with the 
affected 'servitude' of top executives and managing directors who feel 
they have to work 15 hours a day. 

So we come to the paradoxical end-point where it is work itself that is 
consumed. To the extent that work is preferred to free time, that it meets a 
'neurotic' demand, and that the excess of it is a mark of prestige, we are 
in the field of the consumption of work. But we know that anything can 
become a consumer object. 

The fact remains that today, and for long into the future, the distinctive 
value of leisure will remain. Even the reactional valorization of work 
merely proves a contrario the force of leisure as a noble value in our 
deepest conceptions. 'Conspicuous abstention from labour becomes the 
conventional index of reputability', writes Veblen in his Theory of the 
Leisure Class. Productive work is base: this tradition is still alive. It is 
perhaps even reinforced with the increased status competition we find in 
modern 'democratic' societies. This law of leisure-value is assuming the 
force of an absolute social prescription. 

Leisure is not, therefore, so much a function of enjoyment of free time, 
satisfaction and functional repose. Its definition is that of an un- 
productive consumption of time. And so we come back to the 'wasting' 
of time we spoke of at the outset, though in this instance to show how 
consumed free time is in fact the time of a production. This time, which is 
economically unproductive, is the time of a production of value - 
distinctive value, status value, prestige value. Doing nothing (or doing 
nothing productive) is, in this regard, a specific activity. Producing value 
(signs, etc.) is an obligatory social prestation; it is the very opposite of 
passivity, even if the latter forms the manifest discourse of leisure. In fact, 
time is not 'free' in leisure; it is expended, and not as pure loss, because it 
is the moment, for the social individual, of a production of status. No one 
needs leisure, but all are charged to prove their freedom not to perform 
productive labour. 

The consumation of empty time is, therefore, a kind of potlatch, in which 
free time serves as a material of signification and sign-exchange (in 
parallel with all the activities subsidiary and internal to leisure). As 
in Bataille's The Accursed Share, it assumes value in its very destruction, 
in being sacrificed. And leisure is the site of this 'symbolic' operation. 2 

It is, therefore, within the logic of distinction and the production of 
value that leisure is justified in the last instance. We may verify this 
almost experimentally: left to his own devices, in a state of 'creative 
freedom', the leisured individual desperately seeks out a nail to bang in 
or an engine to strip down. Outside the competitive sphere, there are no 
autonomous needs, no spontaneous motivation. But still he does not give 



158 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


up doing nothing. Far from it. Fie imperiously 'needs' to do nothing, for 
this has a value of social distinction. 

Still today, what the average individual seeks in his holidays and free 
time is not the 'freedom to fulfil himself' (as what? what hidden essence 
is going to emerge?), but to demonstrate the uselessness of his time, the 
excess of time he possesses as sumptuary capital, as ivealth. Leisure time, 
like consumption time in general, is becoming the highly charged part of 
social time, the part productive of value - a dimension not of economic 
survival, but of social salvation. 

We can see now what, ultimately, is the basis of the 'freedom' of free 
time. This is akin to the 'freedom' to work and the 'freedom' to consume. 
Just as labour has to be 'freed' as labour power to be able to assume 
economic exchange-value, and just as the consumer must be 'freed' as 
such, that is to say, left (formally) free to choose and establish preferences 
for the system of consumption to be established, so time has to be 'freed', 
that is to say, extricated from its (symbolic, ritual) implications to 
become: not only (1) a commodity (in labour time) in the cycle of economic 
exchange); but also, (2) a sign and sign material assuming, in leisure, a 
social exchange-value (ludic prestige value). 

It is this last modality alone which defines consumed time. Labour time, 
for its part, is not 'consumed' - or, rather, it is consumed only in the 
sense that an engine consumes petrol, a sense which bears no relation to 
the logic of consumption. As for 'symbolic' time, that time which is 
neither economically constrained nor 'free' as sign-function, but bound - 
in other words, indissociable from the concrete cycle of nature or 
reciprocal social exchange - that time is clearly not 'consumed'. In fact it 
is only by analogy with, and projection of, our chronometric conception 
that we call it 'time'; it is a rhythm of exchange. 

In an integrated and total system like ours, there cannot be any free 
availability of time. And leisure is not the availability of time, it is its 
display. Its fundamental determination is the constraint that it be different 
from working time. It is not, therefore, autonomous: it is defined by the 
absence of working time. That difference, since it constitutes the deep 
value of leisure, is everywhere connoted and marked with redundancy, 
over-exhibited. In all its signs, all its attitudes, all its practices, and in all 
the discourses in which it is spoken of, leisure thrives on this exhibition 
and over-exhibition of itself as such, this continual ostentation, this 
marking, this display. Everything may be taken away from it, everything 
stripped from it but this. It is this which defines it. 



10 

The Mystique of Solicitude 


The consumer society is not simply characterized by the abundance of 
goods and services but by the more important fact that in this society 
everything is a service. What is available to be consumed never presents 
itself as pure and simple product, but as a personal service, as gratification. 
From 'Guinness is good for you', via the receptionist's smile and 
the automatic cigarette machine's 'thank-you', to the politicians' deep 
concern for their fellow citizens, each of us is beset by a formidable 
obligingness, surrounded by a conspiracy of devotion and goodwill. The 
tiniest bar of soap is presented as the fruit of the thinking of a whole 
council of experts who have been poring for months over the softness of 
your skin. Airborne puts its entire management team at the service of 
your 'bottom': 

For this is the crux. That is our prime area of study . . . Our business is seating 
you. Anatomically, socially and, almost, philosophically. All our chairs are the 
product of detailed observation of your person ... If a chair has a polyester 
seat, that is all the better to hug the delicate curve of your posterior, etc. 

This chair is no longer a chair, it is a total social service for your 
benefit. 

Nothing is purely and simply consumed today - that is to say, bought, 
possessed and used for particular ends. Objects no longer serve a purpose-, 
first and foremost they serve you. Without this direct object, the person- 
alized 'you', without this total ideology of personal service, consumption 
would not be what it is. It is the warmth of gratification, of personal 
allegiance which gives it its whole meaning - not satisfaction pure and 
simple. It is in the sun of this solicitude that modern consumers bask. 


Social Transfers and Maternal Transference 

In all modern societies, this system of gratification and solicitude has its 
official support structure in the form of all the institutions of social 
redistribution (social security, pension funds, subsidies, insurances, 
grants and the various benefits) by which, as F. Perroux argues, 

the public authorities have been induced to correct the excesses of the powers 
of the monopolies by providing social allocations aimed at satisfying needs 
and not at remunerating productive services. These latter transfers, for which 
nothing is apparently rendered in return, in the long term reduce the aggres- 
siveness of the so-called dangerous classes. 



160 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


We shall not discuss the real efficacy of this redistribution here, or the 
economic mechanisms by which it is effected. What concerns us is the 
collective psychological mechanism it brings into play. Thanks to their 
tax levies and their economic transfers, the social authorities (in other 
words, the established order) arrogate to themselves the psychological 
benefit of appearing generous, present themselves in a charitable light. A 
whole maternal, protectionist lexicon is deployed to refer to these 
institutions: social security, insurance, family allowance, old-age cover, 
unemployment benefit. This bureaucratic 'charity', these mechanisms of 
'collective solidarity' - all of them 'hard-won social gains' - thus act, 
through the ideological operation of redistribution, as mechanisms of 
social control. It is as though a certain part of surplus value were 
sacrificed to preserve the rest 1 - the overall system of power sustaining 
itself with this ideology of munificence in which the 'benefit' bestowed 
conceals the profit taken. This kills two birds with one stone: the wage- 
earner is quite pleased to receive in the guise of gifts or 'free' services a 
part of what has previously been taken from him. 

This is, in short, what J.M. Clarke refers to as the 'pseudo-market 
society'. In spite of their commercial spirit. Western societies protect their 
cohesion by social security legislation, the correction of initial inequal- 
ities and various priority allocations. The principle underlying all these 
measures is an extra-mercantile solidarity. The means is a judicious use 
of a certain dose of constraint for transfers which in themselves obey not 
the principles of equivalence, but the rules of a gradually rationalizing 
redistributive economy. 

More generally, it is, in Perroux's view, true of every commodity that 

it is the nexus not only of industrial processes, but of relational, institutional, 
transferential and cultural ones. In an organized society, people cannot purely 
and simply exchange commodities. What they hand over to each other are 
symbols, significations, services and information. Every commodity must be 
regarded as the nexus of non-chargeable services which qualify it socially. 

Now this point, which is correct, means, if we turn it around, that no 
exchange, no prestation in our society of whatever type is 'free', that the 
venality of exchange, even exchange of the most apparently disinterested 
kind, is universal. Everything is bought and sold, but market society 
cannot concede this either theoretically or legally. Hence the crucial 
ideological significance of the 'social' mode of redistribution: this 
induces in the collective mentality the myth of a social order entirely 
devoted to 'service' and the well-being of individuals . 2 


The Pathos of the Smile 

However, alongside the economic and political institutions, there is a 
whole other - more informal, non-institutional - system of social rela- 
tions which interests us more precisely here. This is that entire network 



The mystique of solicitude 


161 


of 'personalized' communication which is invading everyday consump- 
tion. For we are indeed talking of consumption here - the consumption 
of human relations, of solidarity, reciprocity, warmth and social partici- 
pation standardized in the form of services - a continual consumption of 
solicitude, sincerity and warmth, but consumption in fact only of the 
signs of that solicitude, which is even more vital for the individual 
than biological nourishment in a system where social distance and the 
atrociousness of social relations are the objective rule. 

The loss of (spontaneous, reciprocal, symbolic) human relations is the 
fundamental fact of our societies. It is on this basis that we are seeing 
the systematic reinjection of human relations - in the form of signs - into 
the social circuit, and are seeing the consumption of those relations and of 
that human warmth in signified form. The receptionist, the social worker, 
the public relations consultant, the advertising pin-up girl, all these 
apostles of the social machine have as their secular mission the gratifica- 
tion, the lubrication of social relations with the institutional smile. Every- 
where we see advertising aping intimate, intimist, personal styles of 
communication. It attempts to speak to the housewife in the language of 
the housewife next door, to speak to the executive or the secretary as a 
boss or a colleague, to speak to each of us as our friend or our superego 
or as an inner voice in the confessional mode. It thus produces intimacy 
where there is none - either among people or between people and 
products - by a veritable process of simulation. And it is this, among 
other things (though perhaps this above all), which is consumed in 
advertising. 

The whole of group dynamics and similar practices arise out of the 
same (political) objective or the same (vital) necessity: the accredited 
psycho-sociologist is well paid to reinject solidarity, exchange and com- 
munication into opaque intra-company relationships. 

So it is with the whole tertiary sector of services. With the shopkeeper, 
the bank clerk, the salesgirl or the representative, in information services, 
sales promotion, all these jobs in the packaging, marketing and merch- 
andising of human relations, not forgetting the sociologist, the inter- 
viewer, the impresario and the salesman, whose professional rule is one 
of 'contact', 'participation' and 'gaining the psychological involvement' 
of others - in all these sectors of employment and roles, the connotation 
of reciprocity and 'warmth' is written into the planning and exercise of 
the function. It is the key asset in job-finding, promotion and salary level. 
Having 'human qualities', 'interpersonal skills', 'warmth', etc. We are 
surrounded by waves of fake spontaneity, 'personalized' language, 
orchestrated emotions and personal relations. 'Keep smiling'. Seid nett 
miteinander!': 

The smile of Sofitel-Lyon is the smile we hope to see on your face when you 
step through our door. It is the smile of everyone who has already spent an 
enjoyable time at one of our hotels ... It is the demonstration of our hotel 
philosophy - service with a smile. 



162 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


Or there is operation verres de I'amitie [literally: friendship glasses]: 

Verres de I'amitie, with a dedication from the great names of stage, screen, sport 
and journalism, will serve as 'free gifts' to be given away with the products of 
firms which choose to make a donation to the French Medical Research 
Foundation . . . Among the personalities who have signed and decorated the 
verres de I'amitie are the racing driver Jean-Pierre Beltoise, the cyclist Louison 
Bobet, Yves Saint-Martin, Bourvil, Maurice Chevalier, Bernard Buffet, Jean 
Marais and the explorer Paul-£mile Victor. 

Or TWA: 

We are handing out a million dollars in bonuses to those among our employ- 
ees who have surpassed themselves serving you! This hand-out depends on 
you, our contented passengers. We ask you to vote for the TWA employees 
who have really delighted you with their service! 

A tentacular superstructure which goes far beyond the simple function- 
ality of social exchange to form a 'philosophy', a value system for our 
technocratic society. 


'Playtime' or the Parody of Services 

This huge system of solicitude is based on a total contradiction. Not only 
can it not mask the iron law of market society, the objective truth of social 
relations, which is competition - social distance increasing with urban 
and industrial concentration and crowding - and, most importantly, the 
spread of the abstraction of exchange-value into the very heart of daily 
life and the most personal relationships, but this system, in spite of 
appearances, is itself a system of production. It is the production of 
communication, of human relations in the service sector style. What it 
produces is sociability. Now, as a system of production, it cannot but 
obey the same laws as those of the mode of production of material 
goods. It cannot but reproduce in its very functioning the social relations 
it aims to transcend. Though designed to produce solicitude, it is 
condemned simultaneously to produce - and reproduce - distance, non- 
communication, opacity and atrocity. 

This basic contradiction makes itself felt in all the fields of 'function- 
alized' human relations. Precisely because this new sociality, this 
'radiant' solicitude, this warm 'ambience' no longer has anything spon- 
taneous about it, because it is produced institutionally and industrially, it 
would be astonishing if the social and economic truth of it did not show 
through in its very tone. And it is indeed this distortion we find 
everywhere: everywhere this bureaucratic system of solicitude is skewed 
by, shot through with, aggressiveness, sarcasm and involuntary (black) 
humour, and everywhere the services rendered, the obligingness are 
subtly combined with frustration and parody. And everywhere, linked to 
this contradiction, one feels the fragility of this general system of gratifi- 
cation, and that it is always about to malfunction and collapse (which 
does indeed happen occasionally). 



The mystique of solicitude 


163 


We are touching here on one of the deep contradictions of our so- 
called 'affluent' society: that between the notion of 'service', which has 
feudal origins and traditions, and the dominant democratic values. The 
serf or feudal servant served 'in good faith', without any mental reserva- 
tions: however, the system is already visibly in crisis in Swift's Directions 
to Servants (1745), in which the servants, united on the margins of their 
masters' society, form a society apart, a parasitic, cynical, parodic and 
sarcastic society This is the collapse, where the manners of the day were 
concerned, of the fealty-based society of 'service': it leads to a fierce 
hypocrisy, to a kind of latent, shamefaced class struggle, to reciprocal 
shameless exploitation between masters and servants under cover of a 
system of values which, formally, has not changed. 

Today we have democratic values: as a result, there is an irresolvable 
contradiction at the level of 'services', the provision of which is irrecon- 
cilable with the formal equality of persons. The only outcome is a 
generalized social game (for it is everyone's lot today - and not just in 
private life but also in their social and occupational practice - to receive 
or provide services. Everyone is, to a greater or lesser extent, everyone 
else's tertiary sector). This social game of human relations in a bureau- 
cratic society differs from the fierce hypocrisy of Swift's domestics. It is a 
gigantic 'simulation model' of the absent reciprocity. We no longer have 
dissimulation here, but functional simulation. The vital minimum of 
social communication is only achieved by this pressurized relational 
'performance', in which everyone is engaged. It is a magnificent trompe- 
Voeil, designed to smooth over the objective hostility and distance 
inherent in all present relationships. 

Our world of 'services' is still largely Swift's world. The spite of the 
functionary, the aggressiveness of the bureaucrat are archaic forms that 
are still Swiftian in inspiration. For example, the servility of the ladies' 
hairdresser, the deliberate, unreserved importunity of the commercial 
traveller are still violent, forced, caricatural forms of the service relation- 
ship. Theirs is a rhetoric of servility in which an alienated form of 
personal relationship nonetheless shows through, as it did between 
Swift's masters and servants. The way the bank clerk, the bellboy or the 
postmistress express, by their acrimony or their hyper-devotion, that 
they are paid to do what they do is the very thing that makes them 
human, personal and irreducible to the system. Their coarseness, insol- 
ence, affected reserve, calculated slowness, open aggressiveness or, con- 
versely, their excessive respect is plainly and simply that which, within 
them, is battling against the contradiction of having to embody, as though 
it were natural, a systematic devotion for which they are also paid. Hence 
the unwholesome ambience, constantly verging on veiled aggression, of 
this exchange of 'services' in which the real persons resist the functional 
'personalization' of the exchanges. 

But this is merely an archaic residue: the true functional relationship 
today has resolved all tension. The 'functional' service relationship is no 



164 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


longer violent, hypocritical or sado-masochistic; it is openly warm, 
spontaneously personalized and definitively pacified. We find it in the 
extraordinary, vibrant atonality of the announcers at major airports or on 
TV; in the atonal smile, so 'sincere' and calculated (though, ultimately, it 
is neither of these things for it is no longer a question of sincerity or 
cynicism here, but of 'functionalized' human relations, cleansed of all 
temperamental or psychological aspects, cleansed of all real, affective 
harmonics, and reconstituted on the basis of the calculated vibrations of 
the ideal relationship - in a word, freed from any violent moral dialectic 
of being and appearance, and restored to the simple functionality of the 
system of relations). 

We are still, in our service consuming society, at the crossroads of these 
two orders. This was very well illustrated by Jacques Tati's film Playtime, 
which moved from traditional, cynical sabotage, the wicked parodying 
of services (the whole episode in the fancy restaurant, with the cold fish 
passing from one table to another, the malfunctioning systems, all the 
perversion of 'reception structures', and the breakdown of a world that 
is simply too new) to the useless instrumental functionality of recep- 
tion rooms, armchairs and pot-plants, glass facades and 'impeccable' 
communication, all in the icy solicitude of the countless gadgets and a 
perfect ambience. 


Advertising and the Ideology of the Gift 

The social function of advertising is to be understood in the same extra- 
economic perspective as the ideology of the gift, of free offers and 
service. For advertising is not merely sales promotion or the use of 
suggestion for economic ends. It is perhaps not even these things first and 
foremost (its economic effectiveness is increasingly being questioned): the 
specific message of 'the language of advertising' is the denial of the 
economic rationality of commodity exchange under the auspices of a 
general exemption from payment. 3 

That exemption assumes minor economic dimensions in the form of 
reductions, discounts and free gifts, all the little 'gizmos' and 'freebies' 
offered when one makes a purchase. The profusion of free offers, games, 
competitions and bargains is the outer trappings of promotional activity, 
its external aspect, as it appears to the ordinary housewife. An identikit 
picture: 

In the morning, the housewife/ consumer throws back the shutters of her 
house - that happy house she has won in the Floraline competition. She takes 
her tea from the splendid Persian-style breakfast cups she got with Triscottes 
(only 9 francs 90 plus five tokens). She puts on a little dress - a bargain from 3J 
(20 per cent off) and sets off to the Prisunic, not forgetting her Prisu Card 
which allows her to make cashless purchases . . . No problem finding a main 
course! At the supermarket she played the Buitoni magic lantern game and 
won 40 centimes off a tin of poulet imperial (5 francs 90). And, for her son. 



The mystique of solicitude 


165 


something cultural: the Peter Van Hought painting free with Persil soap 
powder. Thanks to Kellogg's Corn Flakes, he has built himself an airport. In 
the afternoon, to relax, she puts on a record, a Brandenburg Concerto. The LP 
cost her 8 francs with the San Pellegrino three-pack. In the evening, a great 
new experience: a colour TV loaned free of charge by Philips for three days 
(simply on approval, no obligation to buy), etc. 

'I sell less and less washing powder and more and more gifts/ sighs the 
marketing director of a detergent manufacturer. 

These are just the little touches, the window dressing of public 
relations. The point is, however, that the whole of advertising is merely a 
gigantic extrapolation of this 'something extra'. In advertising, the little 
daily gratuities assume the dimensions of a total social fact. Advertising 
is something 'bestowed'. It is a continual free offer to and for everyone. It 
is the prestigious image of affluence, but above all it is the repeated gage 
of the virtual miracle of 'something for nothing'. Its social function is, 
therefore, that of a public relations sector. We know how public relations 
proceeds: the works visit (Saint-Gobain), executive refresher courses in 
Louis XIII chateaux, the photogenic smile of the MD, artworks in the 
factories, group dynamics: 'the task of a PR man is to maintain a 
harmony of mutual interests between public and managers.' In the same 
way, it is the function of advertising in all its forms to set in place a social 
fabric ideologically unified under the auspices of a collective super- 
patronage, a kindly super-feudality, which provides all these 'extras' the 
way aristocrats laid on feasts for their people. Through advertising, 
which is already a social service in itself, all products are presented as 
services, all real economic processes are staged and reinterpreted socially 
as effects of giving, of personal allegiance and affective relations. No 
matter that this munificence, like that of potentates, is only ever a 
functional redistribution of a part of the profits. The trick of advertising 
is precisely to substitute everywhere the magic of the cargo cult (the total, 
miraculous abundance the natives dream of) for the logic of the market. 

All the artful moves of advertising tend in this direction. See how 
discreet it is everywhere, how benevolent, self-effacing and disinterested. 
An hour's radio programme against a one-minute 'ad' for its product. 
Four pages of poetic prose and the company trademark placed shame- 
facedly^!) at the foot of a page. And all its games with itself, piling on 
the self-effacement and the 'anti-advertising' parodies. The blank page 
for the millionth Volkswagen: 'We can't show it to you. We've just sold 
it.' All these things, which could be included in a history of the rhetoric 
of advertising, are logically deducible from advertising's need to dis- 
tance itself completely from the level of economic constraints and to fuel 
the fiction of a game, a party, a charitable institution, a disinterested 
social service. The conspicuous display of disinterestedness plays its part 
as a social function of wealth (Veblen) and an integrating factor. And 
even a play of aggressiveness towards the consumer - antiphrasis - is 



166 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


admissible. All is possible and everything works, though not so much to 
sell as to restore consensus, complicity, collusion - in short, here again, to 
produce relationship, cohesion, communication. The fact that the con- 
sensus produced by advertising can then result in attachment to objects, 
acts of purchase and implicit conformity to the economic imperatives of 
consumption is certain, but it is not the essential point. And, at any 
event, that economic function of advertising is consequent upon its overall 
social function. This is indeed why it is never safely assured . 4 


The Shop-Window 

The shop-window - all shop-windows - which are, with advertising, the 
foci of our urban consumer practices, are also the site par excellence of that 
'consensus operation', that communication and exchange of values 
through which an entire society is homogenized by incessant daily 
acculturation to the silent and spectacular logic of fashion. That specific 
space which is the shop-window - neither inside nor outside, neither 
private nor wholly public, and which is already the street while main- 
taining, behind the transparency of its glass, the distance, the opaque 
status of the commodity - is also the site of a specific social relation. 
Tracking along the shop-windows, with their calculated riot of colour, 
which is always at the same time a frustration, this hesitation-waltz of 
shopping is the Kanak dance in which goods are exalted before being 
exchanged. Objects and products are offered there in a glorious mise-en- 
scene, a sacralizing ostentation (this is not a pure and simple displaying, 
any more than is the case in advertising, but, as G. Lagneau says, a 
'setting-off', a 'showcasing'). This symbolic giving, aped by the objects 
themselves on their stage-set, this symbolic, silent exchange between the 
proffered object and the gaze, is clearly an invitation to real, economic 
exchange inside the shop. But not necessarily, and at any event the 
communication which is established at the level of the shop-window is 
not so much between individuals and objects as a generalized com- 
munication between all individuals, not via the contemplation of the 
same objects but via the reading and recognition in the same objects of 
the same system of signs and the same hierarchical code of values. It is 
this acculturation, this training, which takes place at every moment 
everywhere in the streets, on the walls and in the underground stations, 
on advertising hoardings and neon signs. Shop-windows thus beat out 
the rhythm of the social process of value: they are a continual adaptabil- 
ity test for everyone, a test of managed projection and integration. The 
big stores are a kind of pinnacle of this urban process, a positive 
laboratory and social testing ground, where, as Durkheim writes in The 
Elementary Forms of Religious Life, the collectivity reinforces its cohesion, 
as in feasts and spectacles. 



The mystique of solicitude 


16 7 


Therapeutic Society 

The ideology of a society which is continually taking care of you 
culminates in the ideology of a society which is actually treating you 
medically, as a potential patient. The social body surely must be thought 
rather ill then, and its citizen consumers rather fragile - always on the 
verge of collapse, of becoming unhinged - for this 'therapeutic' discourse 
to be so widespread among professionals, in the public prints and among 
analytical moralists. 

Bleustein-Blanchet: 'In my view, Gallup polls are an indispensable 
gauge of opinion, which the advertiser must use, like a doctor calling for 
tests and X-rays.' 

An ad man: 'What the client is looking for is security. He needs to be 
reassured, taken care of. At times you are a father to him, at times a 
mother or a son.' 'Our profession is akin to the art of medicine.' 'We're 
like medics, we give advice. We don't force anything on anyone.' 'My job 
is a vocation, like a doctor's.' 

Architects, advertising executives, town planners, designers all see 
themselves as demiurges or, rather, as thaumaturges of social relations 
and the environment. 'People live in ugliness': this we have to cure. 
Psycho-sociologists, too, see themselves as therapists of human and social 
communication. This is even true of industrialists, who present them- 
selves as missionaries of well-being and general prosperity 'Society is 
sick': this is the refrain of all the well-meaning souls in power. The 
consumer society is a canker; 'we have to give it back some soul,' says M. 
Chaban-Delmas. It must be said that this great myth of the Sick Society, 
a myth which evacuates all analysis of the real contradictions, is one 
those contemporary medicine-men the intellectuals very largely connive 
in. They however, tend to locate society's ills at a fundamental level. 
Hence their prophetic pessimism. Professionals, in general, tend rather to 
maintain the myth of the Sick Society, as a society that is sick not so 
much organically (in which case it would be incurable) but functionally, 
at the level of its interchanges and metabolism. Hence their dynamic 
optimism: it only has to be cured to re-establish the functionality of 
interchanges, to speed up the metabolism (that is to say once again, to 
inject communication, relationship, contact, human balance, warmth, 
efficiency and the controlled smile). These are all tasks they undertake 
cheerfully and profitably 


The Ambiguity and Terrorism of Solicitude 

What has to be stressed about this whole liturgy of solicitude is its 
profound ambiguity. An ambiguity which coincides very exactly with 
the double meaning of the verb 'to solicit': 



168 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


1 The dimension of 'solicitude', in the 'caring', 'favouring', 'mothering' 
sense. The gift. 

2 The opposite meaning it assumes in the sense of 'requesting' (solicit- 
ing a reply), 'demanding', or even 'commandeering'. This is a sense 
which is even more clearly seen in the modern usage of the term 
('soliciting information', etc.). What is involved here is a diverting, a 
seizing of something; turning it to one's own ends. This is precisely 
the opposite of what is meant by solicitude. 

Now, the function of all the apparatuses of solicitude, institutional or 
otherwise (public relations, advertising, etc.), which surround us - and 
are, indeed, proliferating - is both to care for and to satisfy, on the one 
hand, and surreptitiously to gain by enticement and abduction on the 
other. The average consumer is always subjected to this two-pronged 
undertaking. He is solicited in every sense of the word - the ideology of 
the gift which is conveyed by 'solicitude' serving always as an alibi for 
the real conditioning which is that of his 'solicitation' or entreaty. 5 

This rhetoric of thaumaturgy and solicitude which stamps the con- 
sumer society, the affluent society, with a particular emotional tone has 
precise social functions: 

1 The emotional re-education of individuals isolated within bureau- 
cratic society by the technical and social division of labour and by the 
parallel technical and social division - itself equally total and bureaucratic - 
of consumption practices. 

2 A political strategy of formal integration which covers - and covers 
up for - the failings of the political institutions: just as universal suffrage, 
referendums and parliamentary institutions are designed to establish a 
social consensus through formal participation, so advertising, fashion, 
human and public relations can be interpreted as a kind of perpetual 
referendum - in which citizen consumers are entreated [sollicites] at every 
moment to pronounce in favour of a certain code of values and implicitly 
to sanction it. This informal system of mobilization of assent is safer: it 
leaves practically no way of saying 'no' (admittedly, the political refer- 
endum is also a democratic staging of the affirmative response). In every 
country today we see 'participationist' modes of integration taking over 
from the violent processes of social control (repressive, state, political 
constraints). This they do, first, in the parliamentary, electoral form, and, 
subsequently, through the informal processes of solicitation we are dis- 
cussing. It would be interesting to analyse in this light the 'public 
relations' operation mounted by Publicis/Saint-Gobain in the great 
sociological event that was Boussois's hostile takeover bid for Saint- 
Gobain: public opinion was mobilized, and called upon as a witness and 
a 'psychological stakeholder' in the operation. In the objective restructur- 
ing of the capitalist enterprise, the public found itself, under the guise of 
'democratic' information, integrated as jury, and, through the symbolic 



The mystique of solicitude 


169 


group of the shareholders in Saint-Gobain, manipulated as an actor in 
the drama. One can see how advertising activity, understood in the 
broadest sense, can shape and totalize social processes, how it can 
substitute itself daily - and no doubt even more effectively - for the 
electoral system in psychological mobilization and control. A whole new 
political strategy is coming into being at this level, contemporaneous 
with the objective development of the 'technostructure' and monopoly 
productivism. 

3 'Political' control by solicitation and solicitude is accompanied by a 
more intimate control over motivations themselves. This is where the 
term 'solicit' assumes its double meaning, and it is in this sense that all 
solicitude is basically terroristic. Let us examine the admirable example of 
advertising which runs: 'When a girl tells you she adores Freud, what 
she means is that she loves comic strips: 'a girl is a "little wild thing", full 
of contradictions. Now, beyond these contradictions, it is up to us, 
advertisers, to understand that girl. More generally, to understand the 
people whom we wish to address.' People, then, are incapable of 
understanding themselves, of knowing what they are and what they 
want, but we are there to do that. We know better than you do about 
yourselves. A repressive position of paternalistic analysis. And the 
ultimate ends of this 'higher understanding' are clear: 'Understanding 
people in order to be understood by them. Knowing how to speak to 
them in order to be heard by them. Knowing how to please them in 
order to interest them. In short, knowing how to sell them a product - 
your product. This is what we call "communication".' A marketing trick? 
Not just that. This girl has no right to like Freud. She is wrong and, for her 
own good, we are going to foist upon her what it is that she secretly 
likes. The whole of the social inquisition is here, the whole of psycho- 
logical repression. Advertising in general does not admit these things so 
clearly. Yet, at every moment, it operates the same mechanisms of 
charitable and repressive control. 

It is the same with the advert for TWA: 'the airline which understands 
you'. And just look how it understands you: 

We cannot bear to think of you all alone in your hotel room, frantically 
twiddling the controls of your TV . . . We'll do everything we can to enable 
you to take your better half with you on your next business trip, with our 
special family tariff etc. With your better half alongside you, at least you'll 
have someone to change channels . . . That's what love is. 

There is no question of being alone then. You don't have the right to be 
alone: 'We cannot bear the idea.' If you don't know what it is to be 
happy, we'll teach you. We know better than you. And even how to make 
love: your better half is your erotic 'second channel'. You didn't realize 
that? We'll teach you that too. We are there to understand you. That is 
our role. 



170 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


Sociometric Compatibility 

Sociability or the ability to 'relate to people', to sustain relationships, to 
stimulate exchanges, to intensify the social metabolism, becomes in this 
society a mark of 'personality'. Consuming, spending and following 
fashion and, through these things, communicating with others is behav- 
iour which forms a keystone of the contemporary sociometric 'person- 
ality' outlined by David Riesman in The Lonely Crowd. The whole system 
of gratification and solicitude is, in fact, merely the affective modulation 
(itself functionalized) of a system of relations in which the status of the 
individual is changing totally. To enter the cycle of consumption and 
fashion is not simply to surround oneself with objects and services as one 
pleases; it is to change one's being and directedness. It is to move from 
an individual principle based on autonomy, character, the inherent value 
of the self to a principle of perpetual recycling by indexation to a code in 
which the value of the individual becomes rational, diffracted, change- 
able: it is the code of 'personalization', which no individual himself 
possesses, but which traverses each individual in his signified relation to 
the others. The person as a determining instance disappears and is 
replaced by personalization. From this point on, the individual is no 
longer a centre of autonomous values, but merely the expression of 
multiple relations in a process of shifting interrelationships. 'The other- 
directed person is, in a sense, at home everywhere and nowhere, capable 
of a rapid if sometimes superficial intimacy with and response to 
everyone .' 6 He is, in fact, caught in the toils of a kind of sociometric 
graph and is perpetually redefined by his position in these bizarre 
spiders' webs (these threads which connect A, B, C, D, E, in a web of 
positive, negative, unilateral and bilateral relations). He is, in short, a 
sociometric being, whose definition is that he is at the point of intersection 
with others. 

This is not simply an 'ideal' model. This immanence of others, and this 
immanence in others, governs all status behaviour (and hence the whole 
field of consumption) according to a process of unlimited interrelation- 
ship, where there is not, strictly speaking, any individualized Subject 
with its 'freedom', or 'Others' in the Sartrean sense of the term, but a 
generalized 'ambience', in which the relative terms only assume meaning 
by their differential mobility. The same tendency can be read at the level 
of the objects/ elements and their combinatorial manipulation in modern 
interiors. In this new type of integration, then, it is a matter not of 
'conformism' or 'non-conformism' (although these terms are still con- 
stantly found in journalistic language, they relate to traditional bourgeois 
society), but of optimum sociality, of maximum compatibility with others 
and with the various situations and professions (retraining, versatility), 
of mobility at all levels. To be universally 'mobile', dependable and 
versatile: that is what 'culture' is in the era of human engineering. So, 
molecules form on the basis of the multiple valencies of particular atoms; 



The mystique of solicitude 


171 


they can be unformed and reorganized differently or turned into large, 
complex molecules. This adaptive capacity coincides with a social mobil- 
ity which is different from the rise of the 'traditional' parvenu or self- 
made man. There is no severing of ties in the course of making one's 
individual career, no breaking out of one's class to make one's way, no 
meteoric rise. It is, rather, a question of being mobile with everyone else, and 
rising up the coded rungs of a strictly demarcated hierarchical ladder. 

There is, indeed, no question of not being mobile: mobility is a warrant 
of morality. We also have here, then, in every case, an enforced mobiliza- 
tion. And the unceasing compatibility is also an accounting [ comptabilite ]: 
in other words, the individual, who is defined as the sum of his relations, 
of his 'valencies', is also always accountable as such: he becomes a unit 
of calculation and enters voluntarily into a sociometric (or political) 
plan/calculation. 


Proving Oneself and Approval ( Werbung und Bewdhrung ) 

In this network of anxious relations, in which there is no longer any 
absolute value, but only functional compatibility, it is no longer a 
question of 'asserting oneself', of 'proving oneself' {Bewdhrung), but of 
relating to and gaining the approval of others, soliciting their judgement 
and their positive affinity. This mystique of gaining approval is every- 
where gradually supplanting the mystique of proving oneself. The 
traditional individual's objective of transcendent accomplishment is 
giving way to processes of reciprocal solicitation (in the sense in which 
we defined it above: Werbung). Everyone 'solicits' and manipulates, 
everyone is solicited and manipulated. 

This is the foundation of the new morality, in which individualistic or 
ideological values give way to a kind of generalized relativity, of receptiv- 
ity and agreement, of anxious communication - others must 'speak to' 
you (and speak you: they must address you, but must also express you 
and say what you are), love you, rally round you. We have seen the 
orchestration of this in advertising, which does not so much seek to 
inform you (or even, in the end, to mystify you) as to 'speak to' you. 'It 
is not important,' writes Riesman, 'whether Johnny plays with a truck or 
in the sandbox, but it matters very much whether he involves himself 
with Bill - via any object at all .' 7 We are reaching a point where the group 
is less interested in what it produces than in the human relations within 
it. Its essential work may be, more or less, to produce relationship, and to 
consume this as it goes along. This process may even suffice to define a 
group quite apart from any external objective. The concept of 'ambience' 
sums all this up quite well: 'ambience' is the diffuse sum of relations, 
produced and consumed by the group - the presence of the group to 
itself. If it does not exist, it can be programmed and produced indus- 
trially. This is, indeed, the most common case. 



172 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


In its broadest sense, which goes well beyond common usage, this 
concept of ambience is characteristic of the consumer society which may 
be defined as follows: 

1 Values related to 'objectives' and transcendence (final, ideological 
values) give way to ambience-related (relational, immanent, objective- 
less) values, which exhaust themselves in the moment of relating ('con- 
sumed' values). 

2 The consumer society is simultaneously a society of the production 
of goods and of the accelerated production of relations. Indeed, this latter is 
the defining aspect. This production of relations, which is still craft-based 
at the intersubjective level or the level of primary groups, is, however, 
tending gradually to become aligned to the mode of production of 
material goods or, in other words, to the generalized industrial mode. It 
then becomes, by this same logic, the province (if not, indeed, the 
monopoly) of specialized (private or national) enterprises, and indeed 
constitutes their social and commercial raison d'etre. The consequences of 
this development are as yet difficult to foretell. It is difficult to accept that 
(human, social, political) relationships are produced in the same way as 
objects, and that, once they come to be produced in that same way, they 
become, similarly, objects of consumption. Yet this is, in fact, the case. But 
we are merely at the beginning of a long process here. 8 


Cult of Sincerity - Functional Tolerance 

For it to be produced and consumed, relating must - like material goods, 
like labour power, and according to the same logic - be 'liberated', 
'emancipated'. In other words, it must free itself from all the traditional 
social conventions and rituals. This marks the end of courtesy and 
etiquette, which are incompatible with generalized functional relations. 
But the disappearance of etiquette does not mean that we come to relate 
spontaneously to one another. Our relating simply falls under the sway 
of industrial production and fashion. But because it is the opposite of 
spontaneity, it will imperiously take over all the marks of that spon- 
taneity. Riesman has noted this in his description of the 'cult of sincer- 
ity'. 9 This is a mystique parallel to those of 'warmth' and 'solicitude' we 
have discussed above, as of all the obligatory signs and rites of absent 
communication: '[This] yearning for sincerity is a grim reminder of how 
little they can trust themselves or others in daily life.' 10 

It is, in fact, the ghost of lost sincerity which haunts all this contact- 
based friendliness, these perpetual 'live link-ups', this aping and forcing 
of dialogue at all costs. The authentic relationship is lost, long live 
sincerity! Behind this obsession with 'honest pricing', with sporting, 
sentimental and political fair play, with the 'simple ways of the "great 
and the good" ', the straight-talking confessions of cinema or other idols, 
or telephoto-lens shots of the daily life of royal families - and in this 



The mystique of solicitude 


173 


frantic demand for sincerity (like that for seeing the materials in modern 
building) - there is perhaps also (from a more 'sociological' point of 
view) the acculturated classes' immense mistrust of - and immense 
reaction against - traditional culture and rites, of whatever kind, which 
have always served to mark social distance. A massive obsession, which 
runs through the whole of mass culture - a class expression of the 
declasses of culture: the fear of being had, of being duped and manip- 
ulated by signs as they have been historically over centuries - or, 
alternatively, the fear or rejection of high, ceremonial culture, a fear 
repressed beneath the myth of a culture of the 'natural' and of instant 
communication. 

At all events, in this industrial culture of sincerity, it is still the signs of 
sincerity which are consumed. And that sincerity is no longer opposed to 
cynicism or hypocrisy as it was within the register of being and appear- 
ance. In the field of functional relations, cynicism and sincerity alternate 
without contradicting each other, in the same manipulation of signs. 
Naturally, the moral schema (sincerity = good; artificiality = evil) still 
operates, but it no longer connotes real qualities. It now connotes only 
the difference between the signs of sincerity and the signs of artificiality. 

The problem of 'tolerance' (liberalism, laxism, the 'permissive society', 
etc.) takes the same form. The fact that those who were once mortal 
enemies are now on speaking terms, that the most fiercely opposed 
ideologies 'enter into dialogue', that a kind of peaceful coexistence has 
set in at all levels, that morality is less strict than it was, in no sense 
signifies some 'humanist' progress in human relations, a greater under- 
standing of problems or any such airy nonsense. It indicates simply 
that, since ideologies, opinions, virtues and vices are ultimately merely 
material for exchange and communication, all contradictory elements are 
equivalent in the play of signs. Tolerance in this context is no longer 
either a psychological trait or a virtue: it is a modality of the system itself. It 
is like the total compatibility and elasticity of the elements of fashion: 
long skirts and mini-skirts 'tolerate' each other very well (indeed they 
signify nothing other than the relationship which holds between them). 

Tolerance connotes morally the generalized relativity of functions/ 
signs, objects/signs, beings/signs, relations/signs, ideas/signs. In fact, 
we are beyond the opposition between fanaticism and tolerance, as we 
are beyond that between sincerity and fakery. 'Moral' tolerance is no 
greater than it was before. We have simply changed systems; we have 
moved on to functional compatibility. 



11 

Anomie in the Affluent Society 


Violence 

The consumer society is at one and the same time a society of solicitude 
and a society of repression, a pacified society and a society of violence. 
We have seen that 'pacified' daily life thrives on a daily diet of consumed 
violence, 'allusive' violence: news reports of accidents, murders, revolu- 
tions, the atomic or bacteriological threat - the whole apocalyptic stock- 
in-trade of the mass media. We have seen that the affinity between 
violence and the obsession with security and well-being is not accidental: 
'spectacular' violence and the pacification of daily life are homogeneous, 
because they are each equally abstract and each is a thing of myths and 
signs. We might also add that violence is nowadays inoculated into daily 
life in homoeopathic doses - a vaccine against fatality - to ward off 
the spectre of the real fragility of that pacified life. For it is no longer the 
spectre of scarcity which haunts the civilization of affluence, but the 
spectre of fragility. And that spectre, which is much more menacing 
because it concerns the very equilibrium of individual and collective 
structures, and which has to be warded off at all costs, is in fact kept at 
bay by this roundabout solution of consumed, packaged, homogenized 
violence. This violence is not dangerous violence: blood on the front page 
no more compromises the social and moral order than does sex (despite 
the emotional blackmail on the part of the censors who wish to persuade 
themselves of this, and to persuade us of it). It simply attests to the fact 
that the balance is a precarious one, that the social and moral order is 
made up of contradictions. 

The real problem of violence arises elsewhere. It is the problem of the 
real, uncontrollable violence secreted by plenty and security once a 
certain threshold has been reached. This is no longer integrated violence, 
consumed with the rest, but the uncontrollable violence which well- 
being secretes in its very achievement. That violence is characterized 
(precisely like consumption as we have defined it, though not as super- 
ficially understood) by the fact that it is aimless and objectless } It is 
because we base our lives on the traditional idea of the pursuit of well- 
being as a rational activity that the eruptive, unaccountable violence of 
the Stockholm youth gangs, of the Montreal riots, of the Los Angeles 
murderers, seems an incredible, incomprehensible manifestation and one 
which stands in apparent contradiction to social progress and affluence. 
It is because we base our lives on the moral illusion of the conscious 



Anomie in the affluent society 


175 


finality of all things, of the basic rationality of individual and collective 
choices (the whole system of values rests on this: there is in the consumer 
an absolute instinct which inclines him by essence towards his prefer- 
ential ends - the moral myth of consumption which is the direct heir to 
the idealist myth of man as naturally inclined towards the Beautiful and 
the Good), that this violence seems unspeakable to us, absurd, diabolical. 
Now, perhaps it quite simply means that something far exceeds the 
conscious objectives of satisfaction and well-being by which this society 
justifies itself (in its own eyes) or, rather, by which it reinstates itself 
within the norms of conscious rationality. In this sense, this unexplained 
violence must cause us to reassess all our thinking on affluence: affluence 
and violence go together; they have to be analysed together. 

The more general problem of which this 'objectless' violence is a part, 
a violence which is as yet sporadic in certain countries, but virtually 
endemic in all developed or overdeveloped countries, is that of the 
fundamental contradictions of affluence (and not just its sociological dis- 
parities). It is the problem of the multiple forms of anomie (to use 
Durkheim's term) or of anomaly, depending on whether we look at them 
in terms of the rationality of institutions or the lived evidence of 
normality - forms which run from destructiveness (violence, delin- 
quency), through collective escapist behaviour (drugs, hippies, non- 
violence), to contagious depressiveness (fatigue, suicide, neuroses). Each of 
these characteristic aspects of the 'affluent' or 'permissive' society raises 
in its way the problem of a fundamental imbalance. 

It is not easy to adapt to affluence, say Galbraith and the 'strategists of 
desire': 'our economic attitudes are rooted in the poverty, inequality, and 
economic peril of the past' (or in centuries of puritan morality in which 
humanity lost the habit of happiness ). 2 This difficulty of living in 
affluence should itself show us, if such a demonstration were needed, 
that the alleged 'naturalness' of the desire for well-being is not so natural 
as all that. Otherwise, individuals would not have so much trouble 
getting used to it; they would embrace plenty with open arms. This 
should indicate to us that there is in consumption something quite 
different, and perhaps even something opposite: something for which 
people have to be educated, trained, even tamed. It should tell us that 
there is here, in fact, a new system of moral and psychological con- 
straints which has nothing to do with the realm of freedom. The 
vocabulary of the neo-philosophers of desire is significant in this connec- 
tion. According to them, it is a question simply of teaching people to be 
happy, of teaching them to devote themselves to happiness, of creating 
within them the reflexes of happiness. Affluence is not, then, a paradise. It 
is not a leap beyond morality into the ideal immorality of plenty. It is a 
new objective situation governed by a new morality. Objectively speak- 
ing, it is not therefore an advance, but quite simply something different. 

There is, then, this ambiguity about affluence: it is always simultan- 
eously experienced as euphoric myth (of resolution of tensions and 



176 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


conflicts, of happiness beyond history and morality) and endured as a 
process of more or less enforced adaptation to new types of behaviour, 
collective constraints and norms. The 'Revolution of Affluence' does not 
usher in the ideal society; it simply leads into a different type of 
society. 

Our moralists would like to reduce this social problem to one of 
'mentalities'. So far as they are concerned, the key shift has already 
occurred: real affluence is here and we simply have to move from a 
mentality of scarcity to a mentality geared to affluence. And they deplore 
how difficult this is and are horrified to see forms of resistance to plenty 
emerging. However, one has only to accept for a moment that affluence 
itself is merely (or is also) a system of constraints of a new type to 
understand immediately that the new (more or less unconscious) social 
constraint must be accompanied by a new type of demand for freedom. 
In the event, this takes the form of a rejection of the 'consumer society' in 
violent and Erostratic 3 form (the blind destruction of material and 
cultural goods) or non-violent, abdicationist form (refusal to engage in it 
through either production or consumption). If affluence were freedom, 
then this violence would indeed be unthinkable. If affluence (growth) is 
constraint, then that violence is easy to understand; it follows logically. If 
it is wild, objectless, formless, this is because the constraints it is 
contesting are themselves also unformulated, unconscious, illegible: they 
are the very constraints of 'freedom', of controlled accession to happi- 
ness, of the totalitarian ethic of affluence. 

This sociological interpretation leaves space for (I even believe it 
connects at a deep level with) a psychoanalytic interpretation of these 
apparently aberrant phenomena of the 'rich' societies. The moralists we 
have referred to, who also regard themselves as psychologists, all speak 
of guilt. By this they always mean a residual guilt, a hangover from 
puritan times, which, in terms of their logic, must now be on the decline. 
'We are not yet ready for happiness.' 'The prejudices which do us so 
much harm.' Now it is clear that this guilt (let us accept the term) is, on 
the contrary, increasing as our affluence progresses. A gigantic process of 
primitive accumulation of anxiety, guilt and rejection runs parallel to the 
process of expansion and satisfaction and it is this source of discontent 
which fuels the violent, impulsive subversion of - and murderous 
'acting-out' against - the very order of happiness. It is not therefore the 
past and tradition or any other of the stigmata of original sin which 
cause human beings, rendered fragile by happiness, to become uneasy in 
a state of affluence and, on occasion, to rise up against it. Even though 
that old burden is still there, it is no longer the key factor. Guilt, 'malaise' 
and profound incompatibilities are at the heart of the current system 
itself, and are produced by it in the course of its logical development. 

Forced to adapt to the principle of need, to the principle of utility 
(the principle of economic reality) or, in other words, to the ever full and 
positive correlation between a product of some kind (object, good or 



Anomie in the affluent society 


177 


service) and a satisfaction through the one being indexed to the other; 
forced into this concerted, unilateral and ever positive finality, the whole 
of the negativity of desire, the other side of ambivalence, and hence all the 
things which do not fit into this positive vision, are rejected, censored by 
satisfaction itself (which is not enjoyment [jouissance]: enjoyment, for its 
part, is ambivalent), and, no longer finding any possible outlet, crystal- 
lize into a gigantic fund of anxiety. 4 

This explains the basic problem of violence in the affluent society (and, 
indirectly, all the symptoms of anomaly, depression or abdication). That 
violence, which is radically different from the violence engendered by 
poverty, scarcity and exploitation, is the emergence, in action, of the 
negativity of desire which is omitted, occulted, censored by the total 
positivity of need. It is the opposite mode of the ambivalence which 
resurfaces at the very heart of the smug equivalence of man and his 
environment in satisfaction. It is - against the imperative of 
productivity/ consummativity - the emergence of destructiveness (the 
death drive) for which there can be no bureaucratic reception structures, 
since these would then become a part of a process of planned satisfaction 
and, hence, a system of positive institutions. 5 We shall see, however, that, 
just as there are models of consumption, so society suggests or sets up 
'models of violence' through which it seeks to tap, control and mass- 
mediafy these irruptive forces. 

Indeed, in order to prevent this fund of anxiety, accumulated as a 
result of the breakdown of the ambivalent logic of desire and hence of the loss 
of the symbolic function, from resulting in that uncontrollable, anomic 
violence, society acts at two levels: 

1 On the one hand, it attempts to diminish this anxiety by the 
proliferation of caring agencies: innumerable collective services, roles 
and functions are created; soothing, guilt-dispelling balm and smiles are 
injected into the system - psychological lubricants, not unlike the 
cleansing agents in washing powder. Enzymes gobbling up anxiety. And 
tranquillizers, relaxants, hallucinogens and therapies of all kinds are also 
on sale. An endless task, in which the affluent society, the provider of 
satisfaction without end, exhausts its resources producing the antidote to the 
anxiety generated by that satisfaction. An increasingly large budget goes 
into consoling the beneficiaries of the miracle of affluence for their 
anxious satisfaction. We may liken this to the economic deficit (which is 
not in fact calculable) created by the disbenefits of growth (pollution, 
built-in obsolescence, crowding, scarcity of natural resources), but it 
undoubtedly exceeds that by a very long way. 

2 Society may try - and does try systematically - to claw back that 
anxiety as a means of stimulating consumption, or to claw back the guilt 
and the violence in their turn as consumable goods or distinctive cultural 
signs. There is, then, an intellectual luxury of guilt characteristic of 
certain groups, a 'guilt exchange-value'. Or, alternatively, the cultural 
malaise 6 is offered for consumption like everything else; it is resocialized 



178 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


as a cultural commodity and an object of collective delectation, which 
merely leads more deeply into anxiety, since this cultural metaconsump- 
tion is tantamount to a new censorship and starts the process off again. 
At any event, violence and guilt are mediated here by cultural models and 
turn back into the consumed violence we discussed at the beginning of 
this chapter. 

These two control mechanisms have powerful effects, but they are not, 
however, capable of forestalling the critical process of the turning - the 
subversive conversion - of affluence into violence. And it is useless to 
hold forth and gripe on, as all the critics do, about this 'inevitability' of 
violence, the 'unstoppable spiral', the possible social and moral solutions 
or, on the other hand, about paternalistic permissiveness ('young people 
have to have an outlet for their energies'). Some will look back longingly 
to the days 'when violence had a meaning', the good old violence of war, 
patriotism, passion and, ultimately, rationality - violence sanctioned by 
an objective or a cause, ideological violence or the individual violence of 
the rebel, which was still of the order of individual aestheticism and 
could be regarded as one of the fine arts. People will go on trying to fit 
this new violence into old models and apply known treatments to it. But 
we have to see that this violence, which is no longer strictly historical, no 
longer sacred, ritualistic or ideological - nor yet again, for all that, pure 
act or expression of individual singularity - is structurally linked to 
affluence. This is why it is irreversible, always imminent and so fascinat- 
ing to everyone, whatever their explicit attitudes to it: this is because it is 
rooted in the very process of growth and increased satisfaction in which 
everyone is now involved. From time to time, within our closed universe 
of consumed quietude and violence, this new violence very briefly takes 
over for everyone a part of the lost symbolic function, before resolving 
back into a consumer object. 

Serge Lentz (on The Chase): 'The last scenes of the film are so savage that, 
for the first time in my life, my hands were shaking as I left the cinema. 
In the New York theatres where the film is currently showing, these same 
scenes spark incredible reactions. When Marlon Brando throws himself 
on a man, wild, hysterical members of the audience jump up screaming 
"Kill him! kill him!"' 

July 1966: Richard Speck breaks into a nurses' home in Chicago's south 
side. He binds and gags eight young women all aged about 20. Then he 
executes them one by one by stabbing or strangulation. 

August 1966: C.J. Whitman, an architecture student at the University of 
Austin, Texas, sets himself up with a dozen guns on a 300-foot block 
overlooking the university campus and starts shooting: 13 dead, 31 
injured. 

Amsterdam, June 1966: For the first time since the war, there was 
fighting of extraordinary violence for several days in the very heart of 



Anomie in the affluent society 


179 


the city. The Telegraaf building was stormed. Lorries were burned, 
windows smashed, hoardings torn down. Thousands of demonstrators 
running rampant. Millions of florins' worth of damage. One dead, some 
10 injured. The revolt of the 'Provos'. 

Montreal, October 1969: Grave disorder broke out on Tuesday following 
a strike of policemen and fire fighters. Two hundred taxi drivers ran- 
sacked the premises of a transport company. Shots were fired and two 
people were killed. After that attack, 1,000 young people descended on 
the city centre, smashing shop- windows and looting. There were 10 
bank raids, 19 armed attacks, three terrorist explosions and a host of 
burglaries. Given the scale of these events, the government put the army 
on standby and passed an emergency law conscripting police officers. 

The murder at the Polanski villa: five persons of varying degrees of 
celebrity killed at a villa in the Los Angeles hills, including the wife of 
Polanski, a director of sado-fantastic films. A murder of idols exemplary 
because, by a kind of fanatical irony, it lent material form, in the very 
details of the murder and its staging, to some of the characteristics of the 
films which had won fame and success for the victims. And interesting 
because it illustrated the paradox of that violence: both savage (irra- 
tional, with no obvious objective) and ritualistic (indexed to spectacular 
models imposed by the mass media - in this case, Polanski's very own 
films). Like the Austin murder, this was not a crime of passion, not 
committed by the criminal underworld or done for gain; it lay outside 
the traditional criteria of the legal system or of individual responsibility. 
Mindless, unreflected murders and yet ‘reflected' in advance (here, aston- 
ishingly, to the point of precise imitation) by mass-media models, and being 
reflected along this same route in similar murders or forms of 'acting- 
out' (cf. also suicides by fire). This alone defines them: their spectacular 
connotation as news items, such that they are conceived from the outset 
as film scenarios or as reportage, and their desperate attempt in pushing 
back the limits of violence to be 'irrecuperable', to transgress and smash 
that mass-media order, to which they are in fact party even in their 
asocial vehemence. 

Subculture of Non-Violence 

Indissociable from these new-style phenomena of violence, though for- 
mally opposed to them, are the modern manifestations of non-violence. 
From LSD to flower-power, psychedelia to hippies, zen to pop music, all 
have in common the rejection of socialization through status and the 
principle of productivity, the rejection of this whole contemporary lit- 
urgy of affluence, social success and gadgetry, Whether this rejection 
paints itself as violent or non-violent, it is always the rejection of the 
activism of the society of growth, of enforced well-being as the new 
repressive order. In this sense, violence and non-violence, like all anomic 



180 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


phenomena, have a litmus function. This society which gives itself out to 
be, and sees itself as, hyperactive and pacified is revealed by the beats 
and the rockers on the one hand, and the hippies on the other, to be 
characterized at a deep level by passivity and violence. The one group lays 
hold of the latent violence of this society and turns that violence against 
it, taking it to extremes. The other group extends the secret, orchestrated 
passivity of this society (behind its facade of hyperactivity) into a 
practice of abdication and total asociality, thus causing that society to 
deny itself, in accordance with its own logic. 

Let us leave aside here all the Christie, Buddhist, lamaistic themes of 
Love, Awakening and Heaven on earth, the Hindu litanies and total 
tolerance. The question would seem rather to be the following: do the 
hippies and their community represent a real alternative to the processes 
of growth and consumption? Are they not merely the inverted and 
complementary image of those processes? Are they an 'anti-society', 
ultimately capable of overturning the whole social order, or are they 
merely a decadent outgrowth of that order - or even simply one of the 
many versions of the visionary sects which have always cast themselves 
out of the world in order imperatively to bring about the earthly 
paradise? Here again, we must not mistake the mere metamorphosis of 
an order for its subversion. 

We want to have time for living and loving. The flowers, the beards, the long 
hair and the drugs are secondary. . .Being 'hip' first and foremost means 
being a friend to humanity. Someone who tries to take a fresh, non-hierarchical 
look at the world: a non-violent person, who respects and loves life. Someone 
who has true values and a true sense of proportion, who puts freedom before 
authority and creation before production, who values cooperation and non- 
competition . . . Just someone kind and open who avoids doing others harm. 
That's the main thing. 

Or again: 

As a general rule, doing what you think is right whenever and wherever it 
may be, without worrying about approval or disapproval, on the sole express 
condition that it causes no harm or offence to anyone. 

The hippies immediately made headlines in the West. With its fondness 
for primitive societies, the consumer society immediately seized on them 
as part of its folklore, like a strange, inoffensive flora. Are they not 
ultimately, from a sociological point of view, merely a luxury product of 
rich societies? Are not they, with their orientalist spirituality, their gaudy 
psychedelia, also marginals who merely exacerbate certain traits of their 
society? 

They are, or remain, conditioned by the basic mechanisms of that 
society. Their asociality is communal, tribal. We may speak, in their 
regard, of McLuhan's 'tribalism', that resurrection on a planetary scale, 
under the aegis of the mass media, of the oral, tactile, musical mode of 
communication which was that of archaic cultures before the visual. 



Anomie in the affluent society 


181 


typographical era of the Book. They advocate the abolition of competi- 
tion, of the defensive system and functions of the ego. But this is merely 
to translate into more or less mystical terms what has already been 
described by Riesman as 'other-directedness', an objective evolution of 
personal character structure (organized around the ego and the super- 
ego) towards a group 'ambience' in which everything comes from, and is 
directed towards, others. The hippies' mode of guileless emotional 
transparency is reminiscent of the imperative of sincerity, openness and 
'warmth' of the 'peer group'. As for the regression and infantilism which 
constitute the seraphic, triumphant charm of the hippie communities, 
these needless to say merely reflect, in glorificatory mode, the irrespons- 
ibility and infantilism to which modern society confines each of its 
individuals. In short, the 'Human', almost hounded out of existence by 
productivist society and the obsession with social standing, celebrates its 
sentimental resurrection in the hippie community, where, beneath the 
apparent total anomie, all the dominant structural features of the main- 
stream society persist. 

Writing of American youth, Riesman, referring to the cultural models 
defined by Margaret Mead, speaks of a 'Kwakiuth style and a 'Pueblo' 
style. The Kwakiutl are violent, agonistic, competitive and rich, and 
engage in unrestrained consumption in the potlatch. The Pueblos are 
gentle, kind and inoffensive; they live frugally and are content to do so. 
Our current society can thus be defined by the formal opposition 
between a dominant culture which is one of unrestrained, ritualistic, 
conformist consumption, a culture which is violent and competitive (the 
potlatch of the Kwakiutl) and a permissive, euphoric, 'drop-out' sub- 
culture of the hippie/Pueblo type. But everything indicates that, just as 
violence is immediately reabsorbed into 'models of violence', the contra- 
diction here resolves itself into functional coexistence. The extreme of 
acceptance and the extreme of rejection here meet up, as on a Moebius 
strip by means of a simple twist. And the two models ultimately develop 
in concentric zones around the same axis of the social order. John Stuart 
Mill put it brutally: 'In this age, the mere example of non-conformity, the 
mere refusal to bend the knee to custom, is itself a service .' 7 

Fatigue 

Just as there is a world hunger problem, so there is now also a 
worldwide problem of fatigue. Paradoxically, the two are mutually 
exclusive: endemic, irrepressible fatigue - like the irrepressible violence 
we have discussed above - is the prerogative of rich societies and is a 
product of, among other things, the overcoming of hunger and endemic 
scarcity which remains the major problem for pre-industrial societies. 
Fatigue, as a collective syndrome of the post-industrial societies, thus 
represents one of the profound anomalies, one of the 'dysfunctions' of 
prosperity. As a new mal du siecle, it should be analysed in conjunction 



182 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


with the other phenomena of anomie, whose recrudescence marks our 
age, at a time when such problems ought in fact to be disappearing. 

Just as the new violence is 'objectless', so this fatigue is 'groundless'. It 
has nothing to do with muscular fatigue or lack of energy. It does not 
arise from physical exertion. There is, of course, much spontaneous talk 
of 'nervous strain', of 'depression' and psychosomatic illness. This kind 
of explanation is now part of mass culture: it is in all the newspapers 
(and all the conferences). Everyone can fall back on this, as though it 
were something that could now be taken for granted, and can hence 
derive gloomy pleasure from being a martyr to their nerves. Admittedly, 
this fatigue signifies one thing at least (in this respect it has the same 
revelatory function as violence and non-violence): this society which 
claims to be - which regards itself as being - in constant progress 
towards the abolition of effort, the resolution of tension, greater ease of 
living and automation, is in fact a society of stress, tension and drug use, 
in which the overall balance sheet of satisfaction is increasingly in deficit, 
in which individual and collective equilibrium is being progressively 
compromised even as the technical conditions for its realization are being 
increasingly fulfilled. 

The heroes of consumption are tired. Various interpretations for this 
may be advanced on the psycho-sociological level. Instead of equalizing 
opportunities and reducing social competition (economic and status 
competition), the consumption process makes competition more violent 
and more acute in all its forms. Only in the consumer age are we at last 
in a society of generalized, totalitarian competition, which operates at all 
levels - the economy, knowledge, desire, the body, signs and drives. 
These are all things which are now produced as exchange-value in an 
endless process of differentiation and super-differentiation. 

We may also take it, with Chombart de Lauwe, that, rather than 
matching up 'aspirations, needs and satisfactions' as it claims to do, this 
society creates ever greater disparities both among individuals and 
among social groups who are wrestling, on the one hand, with the 
imperative of competition and upward social mobility and, on the other, 
with the - now highly internalized - imperative to maximalize their 
pleasures. Under so many opposing constraints, the individual comes 
apart. The social discrepancy of inequalities is added to the internal 
discrepancy between needs and aspirations to make this society one that 
is increasingly at odds with itself, disunited, suffering from a 'malaise'. 
Fatigue (or 'asthenia') will then be interpreted as a response on the part 
of modern man - a response in the form of a passive refusal - to his 
conditions of existence. But it has to be seen that this 'passive refusal' is 
in fact a latent violence, and that it is, by this token, only one possible 
response, the others being responses of overt violence. Here again, we 
have to restore the principle of ambivalence. Fatigue, depression, neur- 
osis are always convertible into overt violence, and vice versa. The 
fatigue of the citizen of post-industrial society is not far removed from 



Anomie in the affluent society 


183 


the 'go-slow' or 'slowdown' of factory workers, or the schoolchild's 
'boredom'. These are all forms of passive resistance; they are 'ingrowing' 
in the way one speaks of an 'ingrowing toenail', turning back in towards 
the flesh, towards the inside. 

In fact, we must reverse all the terms of the spontaneous view: fatigue 
is not passivity set against the social hyperactivity outside. It is, rather, 
the only form of activity which can, in certain conditions, be set against the 
constraint of general passivity which applies in current social relations. 
The tired pupil is the one who passively goes along with what the 
teacher says. The tired worker or bureaucrat is the one who has had all 
responsibility taken from him in his work. Political 'indifference', that 
catatonia of the modern citizen, is the indifference of the individual 
deprived of any decision-making powers and left only with the sop of 
universal suffrage. And the physical and mental monotony of work on 
the production line or in the office plays its part, too: the muscular, 
vascular, physiological catalepsy of positions imposed (both standing 
and seated), of stereotyped gestures, of all the inertia of the chronic 
underemployment of the body in our society. But this is not the essential 
point, and this is why 'pathological' fatigue will not be cured by sport 
and muscular exercise as naive specialists contend (any more than it will 
by stimulants or tranquillizers). For fatigue is a concealed form of 
protest, which turns round against oneself and 'grows into' one's own 
body because, in certain conditions, that is the only thing on which the 
dispossessed individual can take out his frustration, just as the blacks 
rebelling in the cities of America begin by burning down their own 
neighbourhoods. True passivity is to be found in the joyful conformity to the 
system of the 'dynamic' young manager, bright-eyed and broad- 
shouldered, ideally fitted to continual activity. Fatigue is an activity, a 
latent, endemic revolt, unconscious of itself. This explains its function: 
the 'slowdown', in all its forms, is (like neurosis) the only way to avoid 
total, genuine breakdown. And it is because it is a (latent) activity that it 
can suddenly go over into open revolt, as the month of May [1968] 
everywhere showed. The spontaneous, total contagion, the 'powderkeg' 
of the May movement can only be explained by this hypothesis: what 
was taken for lifelessness, disaffection and generalized passivity was in 
fact a potential of forces active in their very resignation, in their ebbing - 
and hence immediately available. There was no miracle. And the ebbing 
since May is not an inexplicable 'reversal' of the process either. It is the 
conversion of a form of open revolt into a modality of latent protest (the 
term 'protest' should indeed be applied only to this latter form: it refers to 
the many forms of refusal cut off momentarily from a practice of radical 
change). 

Having said this, the fact remains that, in order to grasp the meaning 
of fatigue, we have to resituate it, beyond psycho-sociological inter- 
pretations, in the general structure of depressive states. Insomnia, head- 
aches, migraines, pathological obesity or anorexia, atony or compulsive 



184 


Mass media, sex and leisure 


hyperactivity: though formally different or opposed, these symptoms 
can in reality be interchanged, can substitute one for another, somatic 
'conversion' being always accompanied, and even defined by, the virtual 
'convertibility' of all symptoms. Now - this is the crucial point - this 
logic of depressiveness (namely that, being no longer linked to organic 
lesions or real dysfunctions, symptoms 'wander around') echoes the very 
logic of consumption (namely that, being no longer linked to the 
objective function of objects, needs and satisfactions succeed one another, 
link up one to another, substitute one for another on the basis of a 
fundamental dissatisfaction). It is the same elusive, unlimited character, 
the same systematic convertibility which regulates the flow of needs and 
the 'fluidity' of depressive symptoms. We shall turn once again here to 
the principle of ambivalence, which we have already mentioned in 
connection with violence, to sum up the total, structural interrelatedness 
of the system of consumption and the system of abreaction/ somatization 
(of which fatigue is merely one aspect). All the processes of our societies 
tend towards a deconstruction, a dissociation of the ambivalence of 
desire. That ambivalence, totalized in jouissance and the symbolic func- 
tion, is split apart, but, in going off in two different directions, it obeys a 
single logic: all the positivity of desire passes into the series of needs and 
satisfactions, where it resolves itself in terms of managed aims; all the 
negativity of desire, however, passes into uncontrollable somatization or 
into the acting-out of violence. This explains the profound unity of the 
whole process: no other hypothesis can account for the multiplicity of 
disparate phenomena (affluence, violence, euphoria, depression) which, 
taken together, characterize the 'consumer society' and which we sense 
are all necessarily inter-linked, though their logic remains inexplicable 
within the perspective of a classical anthropology. 

Though this is not the place to do it, we ought to go further into: 

1 the analysis of consumption as a general process of 'conversion', or, 
in other words, of 'symbolic' transfer of a lack to a whole chain of 
signifiers/ objects successively invested as part-objects; 

2 generalizing the theory of the part-object to the processes of somat- 
ization - here again a symbolic transfer and an investment - on the 
basis of a theory of the body and its status as object within the system 
of modernity. We have seen that this theory of the body is essential to 
the theory of consumption, the body being an epitome of all these 
ambivalent processes: both invested narcissistically as an object of 
eroticized solicitude and invested 'somatically' as an object of concern 
and aggressivity. 

'It's absolutely classic/ comments a specialist in psychosomatic illness. 
'You take refuge in your headaches. It could be anything else at all, such 
as colitis, insomnia, various kinds of pruritus or eczema, sexual difficul- 
ties, obesity, respiratory, digestive or cardiovascular problems ... or 
quite simply, and indeed most often, insurmountable fatigue.' 



Anomie in the affluent society 


185 


Significantly, depression comes to the surface at the point where one is 
released from the constraints of work and where the time for satisfaction 
begins (or should begin) - the managing director with migraines from 
Friday night to Monday morning; suicide or death following hard upon 
retirement, etc. It is very well known too that, beneath the now institu- 
tional, ritual demand for free time, the 'age of leisure' has seen the 
development of a growing demand for work, for activity, a compulsive 
need to 'be doing' or 'acting' in which our pious moralists immediately 
saw a proof that work was man's 'natural vocation'. It seems more likely 
that this non-economic demand for work is an expression of all the 
aggressivity that has not been satisfied in leisure and satisfaction. But it 
can find no resolution by that route since, arising from the depths of the 
ambivalence of desire, it here reformulates itself as a demand or a 'need' 
for work and thus re-enters the cycle of needs, from which we know 
there is no way out for desire. 

Just as violence can be turned to domestic use, to heighten the 
enjoyment of security, so fatigue, like neurosis, can become a cultural 
trait of distinction. Then the whole ritual of fatigue and satisfaction 
comes into play, most often among the cultivated and the privileged 
(though this cultural 'alibi' is filtering down very quickly). At this stage, 
fatigue is no longer anomic at all, and nothing of what we have just said 
of it applies to this 'obligatory' fatigue: this is 'consumed' fatigue and 
forms part of the social ritual of exchange and status. 



CONCLUSION 


On Contemporary Alienation or the 
End of the Pact with the Devil 


The Student of Prague 

The Student of Prague is an old silent film from the 1930s, an expressionist 
film of the German school. 1 It tells the story of a poor but ambitious 
student impatient for a more prosperous life. As he is taking part in a 
drinking bout in a cafe near Prague, a hunt is in progress all around in 
which that city's high society is finding what amusement it can. Someone 
rules over that society and is pulling the strings. He can be seen 
manoeuvring the animals at will and regulating the movements of the 
hunters. And this man of relatively advanced years, with his top hat, 
gloves, knobbed stick, slight paunch and little turn-of-the-century goatee 
beard, looks like one of the hunters. He is the Devil. He contrives to have 
one of the women from the hunt lose her way. She meets the student - 
love at first sight! But the woman, being rich, is beyond his grasp. 
Returning home, the student broods on his ambition and dissatisfaction, 
which have now assumed a sexual dimension. 

The Devil then appears in the student's seedy room, which contains 
only books and a life-size mirror. In exchange for his image in the mirror, 
he offers him a pile of gold. The deal is struck. The Devil peels the 
specular image from the mirror as though it were an etching or a sheet of 
carbon paper, rolls it up, puts it in his pocket, and leaves, in suitably 
obsequious and sardonic fashion. Here the film's real argument begins. 
Thanks to his money, the student enjoys success after success, avoiding, 
with cat-like tread, the mirrors with which the fashionable society in 
which he moves unfortunately surrounds itself. At the beginning, how- 
ever, he retains his peace of mind; he is not greatly vexed at no longer 
seeing his own image. But then, one day, he sees his own flesh-and-blood 
image. This double, which now frequents the same circles and clearly 
takes an interest in him, follows him around and never lets him rest. It is, 
we surmise, his own image - the image he sold - which the Devil has 
revived and put back into circulation. As the good image it is, it remains 
attached to its model; but, as the bad image it has become, it now 
accompanies him not only when he chances to pass by mirrors, but in life 
itself, wherever he goes. He runs the risk of being compromised by it at 
any moment, if the two are seen together (a number of small incidents of 



188 


Conclusion 


this kind have already occurred). And if he flees society to avoid it, it 
takes his place and completes what he had begun, distorting his actions 
to the point of rendering them criminal. One day when he has provoked 
a duel, but has resolved to make his excuses on the duelling ground, he 
arrives at the appointed place at dawn. But he is too late: his double has 
passed that way before him and the opponent is already dead. The 
student hides. His image continues to hound him, as though to be 
avenged for having been sold. He sees the image everywhere. It appears 
to him behind tombs, or at the edge of the cemetery. He is no longer able 
to have any social life; his existence is impossible. In this despairing 
state, he rejects even a sincere offer of love and, to put an end to all his 
troubles, settles on the plan of killing his own image. 

One day, the image pursues him into his room. In the course of a 
violent scene between the two, it happens to pass in front of the mirror 
from which it came. At the memory of this initial scene, nostalgia for his 
image, mingled with fury at what he is enduring on its account, pushes 
the student to the brink. He fires at it. Naturally, the mirror is smashed 
and the double, become again the phantasm it once was, vanishes into 
thin air. But at the same moment, the student slumps to the ground; it is 
he who is dying. For, by killing his image, he is killing himself, since, 
without his noticing it, the image has become living and real in his stead. 
In his death throes, however, he grasps at one of the fragments of the 
mirror scattered about the floor and realizes that he can see himself again. 
He loses his body, but, by paying that price, his normal likeness is 
restored to him just before he dies. 

The mirror image here symbolically represents the meaning of our 
acts. These build up around us a world that is in our image. The 
transparency of our relation to the world is expressed rather well by the 
individual's unimpaired relation to his image in a mirror: the faithfulness 
of that reflection bears witness, to some degree, to a real reciprocity 
between the world and ourselves. Symbolically, then, if that image 
should be missing, it is the sign that the world is becoming opaque, that 
our acts are getting out of our control and, at that point, we have no 
perspective on ourselves. Without that guarantee, no identity is possible 
any longer: I become another to myself; I am alienated. 

This is the first element, then, which the film presents. But it is not 
content merely to tell a general tale. It immediately supplies the concrete 
meaning of the situation. The image is not lost or abolished by chance: it 
is sold. It falls into the commodity sphere, we might say, and this is 
indeed the sense of concrete, social alienation. At the same time, the fact 
that the Devil can pocket this image as an object is also the fantastic 
illustration of the real process of commodity fetishism: from the moment 
they are produced, our works and our acts fall out of our grasp and 
are objectivized; they fall, literally, into the Devil's hands. Thus, in 
Chamisso's Peter Schlemihl the shadow too is separated from the person 
maleficently and becomes a pure thing, an article of apparel one might 



Contemporary Alienation 


189 


leave at home if one were not careful and which could get stuck to the 
ground if there were too sharp a frost. Schlemihl, who has lost his 
shadow, fancies he might have one drawn for him by a painter - one 
which will follow him about. And Egyptian legends say that one should 
not walk too close to water, since crocodiles have a taste for passing 
shadows. The plots of the two tales are equivalent: whether we are 
speaking of image or shadow, it is in each case the transparency of our 
relation to ourselves and to the world that is shattered, and life then loses 
its meaning. But there is one thing in the fables of Schlemihl and The 
Student of Prague that is superior to many other pacts with the Devil: the 
fact that they put Gold, and Gold alone - that is to say, commodity logic 
and exchange-value - at the centre of alienation. 

The two fables do, however, proceed in quite different ways after that, 
with the logic of the Schlemihl story - in which Chamisso does not carry 
through the consequences of the shadow being transformed into an 
object - lacking rigour. Chamisso fills out his tale with fantastical, comic 
episodes, like the chase over the 'sunlit sandy plain' after a wandering, 
masterless shadow, which might be his, or when the Devil gives him 
back his shadow to try out again for a few hours. But Schlemihl does not 
suffer directly from his alienated shadow; he suffers only the social 
reprobation which attaches to the absence of a shadow. Once it has 
escaped, it does not turn against him to become the instrument which 
destroys his very being. Schlemihl is condemned to solitude, but he 
remains the same. Neither his consciousness nor his life is taken from him, 
only life in society. Hence the final compromise, in which he stoically 
rejects the second bargain proposed by the Devil, which would give him 
back his shadow in exchange for his soul. Thus, he loses his shadoiv, but he 
saves his soul. 

The Student of Prague follows a much tighter logic. As soon as he has 
sold his image or, in other words, has sold a part of himself, the student 
is hounded to his death by it in real life. This translates the unvarnished 
truth of the process of alienation: nothing of what is alienated runs off 
into some neutral circuit, into an 'external world' over against which we 
might be said to remain free - suffering, with each dispossession, only a 
loss in our having, but always retaining possession of ourselves in our 
'private' sphere and ultimately remaining intact in our being. This is the 
reassuring fiction of the 'inner self' or 'heart of hearts' ] for interieur ], 
where the soul is free of the world. Alienation goes much deeper than 
that. There is a part of us which gets away from us in this process, but we 
do not get away from it. The object (the soul, the shadow, the product of 
our labour become object) takes its revenge. All we are dispossessed of 
remains attached to us, but negatively. In other words, it haunts us. That 
part of us sold and forgotten is still us, or rather it is a caricature of us, 
the ghost, the spectre which follows us; it is our continuation and takes its 
revenge. 



190 


Conclusion 


We encounter the troubling atmosphere of this inversion of subject and 
object, this sorcery of the otherness of the same, in the most everyday 
expressions: 'He followed him about like a shadow.' And also in our cult 
of the dead - a propitiating of a part of us which is alienated once and for 
all, and from which, as a consequence, we can expect only ill. Now, there 
is a part of ourselves by which, ivhen living, we are collectively haunted: 
social labour power, which, once sold, returns, through the whole social 
cycle of the commodity, to dispossess us of the meaning of labour itself; 
labour power which has become - by a social, not a diabolical, operation, 
of course - the materialized obstacle to the fruits of our labours. It is all 
this which is symbolized in The Student of Prague by the sudden emer- 
gence, live and hostile, of the image, and by the long suicide (for such we 
must call it) which that image imposes on the one who sold it. 

What is crucial here, and is dramatically demonstrated to us, is that the 
alienated human being is not merely a being diminished and impov- 
erished but left intact in its essence: it is a being turned inside out, 
changed into something evil, into its own enemy, set against itself. This 
is, on another level, the process Freud describes in repression: the 
repressed returning through the agency of repression itself. It is the body 
of Christ on the cross changing into a woman to obsess the monk who 
has taken a vow of chastity. In alienation, it is the human being's 
objectivized life-forces which at any moment change into him to his cost, 
and thus drive him to his death. 

In the end, Schlemihl gives relative meaning to his life and dies a 
natural death, like a solitary American industrialist, in a charitable 
institution he himself founded in the days when he was wealthy. He 
saved his soul by rejecting the second bargain. This division of the action 
flows necessarily from the ambiguity of the initial idea and, as a result, 
the fable entirely loses its rigour. 

In The Student of Prague, there is no second bargain. The student dies 
inexorably from the logical consequences of the first. This means that, for 
Chamisso, it is possible to sell one's shadow - that is to say, to be 
alienated in all respects of one's behaviour - and still to save one's soul. 
Alienation leads only to a conflict in social appearances, and, that being 
the case, Schlemihl can very easily overcome it abstractly in solitude, 
whereas The Student of Prague develops the objective logic of alienation in 
all its rigour and shows that there is no way out but death. Every ideal 
solution for overcoming alienation is cut off. Alienation cannot be 
overcome: it is the very structure of the bargain with the Devil. It is the very 
structure of market society. 


The End of Transcendence 

The Student of Prague is a remarkable illustration of the processes of 
alienation, that is to say, of the generalized pattern of individual and 



Contemporary Alienation 


191 


social life governed by commodity logic. Moreover, since the early 
Middle Ages, the Pact with the Devil has been the central myth of a 
society engaged in the historical and technical process of the domination 
of Nature, that process being always simultaneously a process of the 
taming of sexuality. Among the forces of evil, indexed to the Devil, 
the Western 'Sorcerer's Apprentice' has served constantly to thematize 
the immense guilt attaching to the puritanical. Promethean enterprise of 
Progress, of sublimation and labour, of rationality and efficiency. That is 
why this medieval theme of the re-emergence of the repressed - of being 
haunted by the repressed and selling one's soul (the 'pact' reflecting the 
irruption of market processes into early bourgeois society) - was revived 
by the romantics in the very earliest years of the 'industrial age'. Since 
then, the theme has continued to run (parallel to the myth of the 'miracle 
of technology') beneath the myth of the inevitability of technology. All our 
current science fiction is steeped in it, as is the whole of everyday 
mythology, from the peril of the atomic catastrophe (the technological 
suicide of civilization) to the theme, played out in a thousand variations, 
of the fatal gap between technical Progress and human social morality. 

We may, therefore, suggest that the age of consumption, being the 
historical culmination of the whole process of accelerated productivity 
under the sign of capital, is also the age of radical alienation. Commodity 
logic has become generalized and today governs not only labour pro- 
cesses and material products, but the whole of culture, sexuality, and 
human relations, including even fantasies and individual drives. Every- 
thing is taken over by that logic, not only in the sense that all functions 
and needs are objectivized and manipulated in terms of profit, but in the 
deeper sense in which everything is spectacularized or, in other words, 
evoked, provoked and orchestrated into images, signs, consumable 
models. 

But the question then is: in so far as it revolves around the alterity of the 
selfsame (that is to say, around an alienated, abducted, essence of man), 
can this schema (or this concept) of alienation still be operative in a 
context in which the individual is no longer ever confronted with his 
own split image? The myth of the Pact and the Sorcerer's Apprentice is 
still a demiurgic myth, the myth of the Market, Gold and Production, the 
transcendent objective of which turns around against human beings 
themselves. By contrast, consumption is not Promethean; it is hedonistic 
and regressive. Its process is no longer one of labour and self-surpassing, 
but a process of absorption of signs and absorption by signs. It is, therefore, 
characterized, as Marcuse says, by the end of transcendence. In the 
generalized process of consumption, there is no longer any soul, no 
shadow, no double, and no image in the specular sense. There is no 
longer any contradiction within being, or any problematic of being and 
appearance. There is no longer anything but the transmission and 
reception of signs, and the individual being vanishes in this combinatory 
and calculus of signs. Consumer man never comes face to face with his 



192 


Conclusion 


own needs, any more than with the specific product of his labour; nor is 
he ever confronted with his own image: he is immanent in the signs he 
arranges. There is no transcendence any more, no finality, no objective: 
what characterizes this society is the absence of 'reflection', of a per- 
spective on itself. There is, therefore, no maleficent agency either, like that 
of the Devil, with whom one could enter into a Faustian pact to gain 
wealth and glory, since one is given these things by a beneficent, maternal 
ambience - the affluent society itself. Or, alternatively, we must suppose 
that it is society as a whole, as a societe anonyme, as a thing of 'limited 
liability', which has struck a contract with the Devil, has bartered all 
transcendence and finality for affluence, and is now haunted by an 
absence of ends. 

In the specific mode of consumption, there is no transcendence any 
more, not even the fetishistic transcendence of the commodity. There is now 
only immanence in the order of signs. Just as there is no agonizing 
ontological struggle, but a logical relation between the signifier and the 
signified, so there is no longer an ontological struggle between the being 
and its double (its shadow, its soul, its ideal), whether divine or diabolic; 
there is logical calculation of signs and absorption into the system of 
signs. There is no longer any mirror or looking-glass in the modern order 
in which the human being would be confronted with his image for better 
or for worse; there is only the s hop-ivindozv - the site of consumption, in 
which the individual no longer produces his own reflection, but is 
absorbed in the contemplation of multiple signs/objects, is absorbed into 
the order of signifiers of social status, etc. He is not reflected in that 
order, but absorbed and abolished. The subject of consumption is the order of 
signs. Whether we define this latter structurally, as the instance of a code, 
or empirically as the generalized ambience of objects, the involvement of 
the subject is no longer, at any event, that of an 'alienated' essence in the 
philosophical, Marxist sense of the term. It is not that of an essence 
which is dispossessed, taken over by some alienating agency and become 
foreign to itself. For there is no longer, properly speaking, any 'selfsame', 
any 'subject itself', or, therefore, any 'alterity of the selfsame', and 
therefore no alienation in the strict sense. The situation is rather like that 
of the child kissing his image in the mirror before going to bed: he 
doesn't entirely mistake the image for himself, since he has already 
'recognized' it. Nor is it an alien double in which he is reflected: he plays 
with it, somewhere betiveen sameness and otherness. So it is with the 
consumer: he 'plays out' his personalization between one term and 
another, one sign and another. Between signs there is no contradiction, 
just as there is no exclusive opposition between the child and his image: 
there is collusion and ordered involvement. The consumer defines 
himself by his choice within a 'game' played between different models 
or, in other words, by his combinatorial involvement in that game. It is in 
this sense that consumption is ludic and that the ludic dimension of 
consumption has gradually supplanted the tragic dimension of identity. 



Contemporary Alienation 


193 


From Spectre to Spectrum 

We have today no myth equal to that of the Pact with the Devil or the 
Sorcerer's Apprentice (which thematized the fatal contradiction between 
the individual being and his Double) to thematize the peaceful coexist- 
ence - in the guise of a paradigmatic declension - of the successive terms 
which define the 'personal' model. Tragic duality (which the situationists 
are again restoring in the concept of the 'spectacle', the 'society of the 
spectacle', and radical alienation) had its great myths, all of them linked 
to the notion of a human essence and the inevitability of losing it - linked 
to Being and its spectre. But the ludic ramification of the person into a 
spectrum of signs and objects, nuances and differences, which constitutes 
the basis of the consumption process and totally redefines the individual 
not as alienated substance but as shifting difference - this novel process, 
which is not analysable in terms of the person (what an admirable 
amphibology we have in the French word personne which, on its own, 
means 'no one'!) and the alterity of the person, has not found an 
equivalent myth to embody the Metaphysics of Consumption - a meta- 
physical myth to represent what the Double and Alienation represented 
for the order of production. This is no accident. Myths, like the faculties of 
speech, reflection and transcription, are indissociable from transcend- 
ence, and disappear with it. 


Consumption of Consumption 

If the consumer society no longer produces myth, this is because it is 
itself its oivn myth. The Devil, who brought Gold and Wealth (the price of 
which was our soul), has been supplanted by Affluence pure and simple. 
And the pact with the Devil has been supplanted by the contract of 
Affluence. Moreover, just as the most diabolical aspect of the Devil has 
never been his existing, but his making us believe that he exists, so 
Affluence does not exist, but it only has to make us believe it exists to be 
an effective myth. 

Consumption is a myth. That is to say, it is a statement of contemporary 
society about itself, the way our society speaks itself. And, in a sense, the 
only objective reality of consumption is the idea of consumption; it is this 
reflexive, discursive configuration, endlessly repeated in everyday 
speech and intellectual discourse, which has acquired the force of 
common sense. 

Our society thinks itself and speaks itself as a consumer society. As 
much as it consumes anything, it consumes itself as consumer society, as 
idea. Advertising is the triumphal paean to that idea. 

This is not a supplementary dimension; it is a fundamental one, for it 
is the dimension of myth. If we did nothing but consume (getting, 
devouring, digesting), consumption would not be a myth, which is to 



194 


Conclusion 


say that it would not be a full, self-fulfilling discourse of society about 
itself, a general system of interpretation, a mirror in which it takes 
supreme delight in itself, a utopia in which it is reflected in advance. In 
this sense, affluence and consumption - again, we mean not the con- 
sumption of material goods, products and services, but the consumed 
image of consumption - do, indeed, constitute our new tribal mythology 
- the morality of modernity. 

Without that anticipation and reflexive potentialization of enjoyment 
in the 'collective consciousness', consumption would merely be what it is 
and would not be such a force for social integration. It would merely be 
a richer, more lavish, more differentiated mode of subsistence than 
before, but it would no more have a name than ever it did before, when 
nothing designated as collective value, as reference myth what was 
merely a mode of survival (eating, drinking, housing and clothing 
oneself) or the sumptuary expenditure (finery, great houses, jewels) of 
the privileged classes. Neither eating roots nor throwing feasts was given 
the name 'consuming'. Our age is the first in which current expenditure 
on food and 'prestige' expenditure have both been termed consumption 
by everyone concerned, there being a total consensus on the matter. The 
historic emergence of the myth of consumption in the twentieth century 
is radically different from the emergence of the technical concept in 
economic thinking or science, where it was employed much earlier. That 
terminological systematization for everyday use changes history itself: it 
is the sign of a new social reality. Strictly speaking, there has been 
consumption only since the term has 'passed into general usage'. 
Though it is mystifying and analytically useless - a veritable 'anti- 
concept' indeed - it signifies, nonetheless, that an ideological restructur- 
ing of values has occurred. The fact that this society experiences itself as 
a consumer society must be the starting point for an objective analysis. 

When we say that this 'affluent' society is its own myth, we mean that 
it takes over, at a general level, that admirable advertising slogan which 
might happily serve as its motto: the body you dream of is your own. A 
kind of immense collective narcissism is inducing society to merge itself 
into - and absolve itself in - the image it presents of itself, to be 
convinced of itself in the way that advertising ends up convincing 
people of their bodies and the prestige values of those bodies. In short, it 
is becoming its own 'self-fulfilling prophecy '. 2 Boorstin has shown how 
this immense process of self-demonstrative tautology works in the USA, 
where a whole society speaks itself in the mode of prophecy, but a 
prophecy which does not have future ideals or transcendent heroes for 
its substance, but solely the reflection of itself and of its immanence. 
Advertising is dedicated entirely to this function: the consumer can at 
any moment read, as in Till Eulenspiegel's mirror, what he is and what 
he desires - and fulfil that desire in the process. There is no longer any 
ontological distance or fissure. The suture is immediate. It is the same 
with opinion polls, market research surveys and all those actions in 



Contemporary Alienation 


195 


which the great Delphic Oracle of Public Opinion is made to speak and 
to rave: they foretell social and political events and substitute them- 
selves, like identikit pictures, for the real events, which end up reflecting 
them. Hence, as Boorstin writes, 'public opinion - once the public's 
expression - becomes more and more an image into which the public fits 
its expression. Public opinion becomes filled with what is already there. 
It is the people looking in the mirror.' 3 So it is too with celebrities, stars 
and 'heroes of consumption': 

The hero stood for outside standards. The celebrity is a tautology . . . 
Celebrities are known primarily for their well-knownness. Yet the celebrity is 
usually nothing greater than a more publicized version of us. In imitating him, 
in trying to dress like him, talk like him, look like him, think like him, we are 
simply imitating ourselves ... By imitating a tautology, we ourselves become 
a tautology standing for what we stand for . . . We look for models, and we see 
our own image . 4 

And of television, Boorstin remarks: 'At home we begin to try to live 
according to the script of television programmes of happy families, 
which are themselves nothing but amusing quintessences of us.' 5 

Like every great myth worth its salt, the myth of 'Consumption' has its 
discourse and its anti-discourse. In other words, the elated discourse on 
affluence is everywhere shadowed by a morose, moralizing, 'critical' 
counter-discourse on the ravages of consumer society and the tragic end 
to which it inevitably dooms society as a whole. That counter-discourse 
is to be heard everywhere. Not only is it found in intellectualist dis- 
course, which is always ready to distance itself by its scorn for 'simple- 
minded values' and 'material satisfactions', but it is now present within 
'mass culture' itself: advertising increasingly parodies itself, integrating 
counter-advertising into its promotional technique. France-Soir, Paris- 
Match, the radio, the TV, and ministerial speeches all contain as an 
obligatory refrain the lament on this 'consumer society', where values, 
ideals and ideologies are giving way to the pleasures of everyday life. We 
shall not soon forget Chaban-Delmas's famous flight of oratory: 'We 
have to control consumer society by giving it back some soul!' 

This endlessly repeated indictment is part of the game: it is the 
critical mirage, the anti-fable which rounds off the fable - the discourse 
of consumption and its critical undermining. Only the two sides taken 
together constitute the myth. We have, therefore, to allot to the 'critical' 
discourse and the moralizing protest their true responsibility for the 
elaboration of the myth. It is that discourse which locks us definitively 
into the mythic and prophetic teleology of the 'Civilization of the Object'. 
It is that discourse which, being itself much more fascinated by the 
Object than either common sense or the grassroots consumer, transfig- 
ures it into a mythic and fascinated anti-object critique. The rebels of 
May 1968 did not escape this trap of reifying objects and consumption 
excessively by according them diabolical value, of denouncing them as 
such and building them up into a determining instance. And the real 



196 


Conclusion 


work of myth-making lies here. If all the denunciations, all the disquisi- 
tions on 'alienation', and all the derisive force of pop and anti-art play so 
easily into establishment hands, that is because they are themselves part 
of the myth, which they round out by providing the counter-melody 
within the formal liturgy of the Object we spoke of at the beginning - 
and do so in a manner that is without doubt more perverse than the 
spontaneous adherence to consumer values. 

In conclusion, we shall say that this counter-discourse, which estab- 
lishes no real distance, is as immanent in consumer society as any of its 
other aspects. This negative discourse is the intellectual's second home. 
Just as medieval society was balanced on God and the Devil, so ours is 
balanced on consumption and its denunciation. Though at least around 
the Devil heresies and black magic sects could organize. Our magic is 
white. No heresy is possible any longer in a state of affluence. It is the 
prophylactic whiteness of a saturated society, a society with no history 
and no dizzying heights, a society with no other myth than itself. 

But here we are once again speaking in morose, prophetic terms, 
caught in the trap of the Object and its apparent plenitude. Now, we 
know that the Object is nothing and that behind it stands the tangled 
void of human relations, the negative imprint of the immense mobiliza- 
tion of productive and social forces which have become reified in it. We 
shall await the violent irruptions and sudden disintegrations which will 
come, just as unforeseeably and as certainly as May 1968, to wreck this 
white Mass. 



Notes 


Chapter 1 

1 K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Lawrence and Wishart, 
London, 1971, p. 87. 

2 Contrary to a rather odd assertion in Mark Poster's book Jean Baudrillard: Selected 
Writings (Polity, 1988, p. 55, note 4), Flaine is not 'Baudrillard's parody of suburban 
communities around Paris' but a genuine ski resort in Haute-Savoie (Tr.). 


Chapter 2 

1 This situation is almost ideally realized by a city like Berlin. Moreover, almost all 
science-fiction novels have as their theme the situation of a rational and 'affluent' Great 
City threatened with destruction from without or within by some great hostile force. 


Chapter 3 

1 Tables appearing in the original French have been removed at the author's request 
(Tr.). 

2 J.K. Galbraith, The Affluent Society, Penguin in association with Hamish Hamilton, 
Harmondsworth, 1962, p. 210. 

3 There is in this sense an absolute difference between waste in our 'affluent societies', 
a waste that is a nuisance integrated into the economic system, which is a functional wastage 
not productive of collective value, and the destructive prodigality engaged in by all the so- 
called 'societies of scarcity' in their festivals and sacrifices, this latter being waste 'by 
excess', in which the destruction of goods was a source of collective symbolic values. 
Breaking up old cars that have gone out of fashion or burning coffee in locomotives is in no 
sense festive. It is a deliberate, systematic destruction for strategic ends. So too is military 
expenditure (perhaps only advertising . . .). The economic system cannot transcend itself in 
an act of festive waste, caught up as it is in its own alleged 'rationality'. It can only devour 
its excess of wealth as it were shamefully, practising a calculated destructiveness that is 
complementary to its productivity calculations. 


Chapter 4 

1 The term 'inequality' is inappropriate. The equality /inequality opposition, ideo- 
logically linked to the system of modern democratic values, only fully covers economic 
disparities and cannot figure in a structural analysis. 

2 Or the 'Great Society', recently imported into France. 

3 On this point, see Chapter 7 in relation to 'lowest common culture' and 'lowest 
common multiples'. 

4 It is, of course, in its functioning as a system of social differentiation (2 above) that 
consumption takes on this unlimited dimension. As a system of communication and 



198 


The consumer society 


exchange (1 above), where it may be compared to language, a finite range of goods and 
services (like the finite material of linguistic signs) can very well suffice, as we see in 
primitive societies. Language [la langue] does not proliferate because there is no ambivalence 
of the sign at that level, that ambivalence being grounded in social hierarchy and 
simultaneous double determination. By contrast, a certain level of parole and style does give 
rise again to distinctive proliferation. 

5 On this point, see Chapter 5, section 'Consumption as the Emergence and Control of 
New Productive Forces'. 

6 This is the 'reserve army' of needs. 

7 This growing differentiation does not necessarily signify a growing distance from the 
top to the bottom of the scale, a 'greater overall imbalance', but increasing discrimination, an 
increase in the quantity of distinctive signs within a hierarchy whose extremes have moved 
closer together. Relative 'democratization' and homogenization are accompanied by a 
related intensification in status competition. 

8 In this sense, the distinction between 'real' and 'artificial' needs is also a false 
problem. 'Artificial needs' do, of course, mask the non-satisfaction of 'essential' needs 
(television instead of education). But this is secondary to generalized determination by 
growth (the expanded reproduction of capital), in respect of which the terms 'natural' and 
'artificial' have no meaning. We might even say that this natural-artificial opposition, 
which implies a theory of human finalities, is itself an ideological product of growth. It is 
reproduced by growth and is functionally linked to it. 

9 Les Temps modernes, October 1968. 


Chapter 5 

1 Quoted by Galbraith, The Neiv Industrial State, Signet, New York, 1967, epigraph to 
Chapter 10. 

2 In the survey carried out by Selection du Reader's Digest (A. Piatier, 'Structures et 
perspectives de la consommation europeenne'), the pattern which emerges is not one of an 
immense middle class, as in the case of the USA, but that of a minority, a consumer elite 
(the As) serving as a model for a majority which does not yet possess that range of luxury 
goods (sports car, stereo, second home) which every European worthy of the name must 
have. 

3 Galbraith, The Neiv Industrial State, p. 215. 

4 Ibid., p. 222. 

5 This is the 'anti-coagulant' effect of advertising (Elgozy). 

6 Galbraith, The New Industrial State, p. 281. 

6 Ibid., p. 279. 

8 Ibid., p. 280. 

9 On this, see this chapter, section 'Consumption as the Emergence and Control of 
New Productive Forces'. 

10 J. Baudrillard, 'The ideological genesis of needs', in For a Critique of the Political 
Economy of the Sign, Telos, St Louis, 1981, pp. 63-87. 

11 This paragraph has been slightly modified by the author (Tr.). 

12 La Nef, no. 37. 

13 Galbraith, The New Industrial State, p. 49. 

14 On this point, see Chapter 10, 'The Mystique of Solicitude'. 


Chapter 6 

1 It is the same with relationships. The system is built upon a total liquidation of 
personal ties, of concrete social relations. It is to this extent that it becomes necessarily and 



Notes 


199 


systematically productive of relationship (public relations, human relations, etc.). The 
production of relationships has become one of the key sectors of production. And because 
they no longer have anything spontaneous about them, because they are produced, those 
relationships are necessarily fated, like all that is produced, to be consumed (unlike social 
relations, which are the unconscious product of social labour and not the result of 
deliberate, controlled industrial production: these are not 'consumed' but are, in fact, the 
site of social contradictions). 

On the production and consumption of human relations and social relationships, see 
Chapter 10, 'The Mystique of Solicitude'. 

2 D. Riesman, Abundance for What? And Other Essays, Chatto and Windus, London, 
1964, p. 129. 

3 D. Riesman (with N. Glazer and R. Denney), The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the 
Changing American Character, Doubleday Anchor, New York, n.d., pp. 98-9. 

4 See Chapter 11, section 'Violence'. 


Chapter 7 

1 The reference is to the Le President health clubs. See note 4 to Chapter 8 (Tr. ) . 

2 If beauty is to be found in the 'figure', the career is defined by its 'profile'. Such 
connivances of vocabulary are significant. 

3 See this chapter, section 'Pseudo-Event and Neo-Reality'. The term 'gadget' covers a 
rather different semantic field in French, referring in particular to objects which are not 
necessarily technical implements, but merely useless objects of a 'gimmicky' kind. How- 
ever, since the French usage will be reasonably clear from the author's argument here, I 
have generally retained the term 'gadget', which has at least equally pejorative connota- 
tions in English (Galbraith writes, 'The word gadget is itself a pejorative term for durable 
goods', The Affluent Society, p. 162) (Tr.). 

4 Tirlipot is the name of a 1960s radio quiz game. 

5 Le Monde, 28 September 1969. 

6 There is, in this sense, a relationship of sorts between kitsch and snobbery. However, 
snobbery is linked, rather, to the aristocracy/bourgeoisie acculturation process and kitsch 
essentially to the rise of the 'middle' classes in a bourgeois industrial society. 

7 But it is not a toy, as the toy has a symbolic function for the child. However, a 'new 
look' toy, a fashionable toy becomes a gadget once again simply by dint of such 
modishness. 

8 The pure gadget, defined as something totally useless to anyone at all, would be an 
absurdity. 

9 An annual French competition for artisans and inventors (Tr.). 

10 See Daniel J. Boorstin, The Image, or What Happened to the American Dream, Penguin, 
Harmondsworth, 1963. 

11 The cubists were still searching for the 'essence' of space, seeking to unveil a 'secret 
geometry', etc. In Dada, Duchamp or the surrealists, objects were wrenched from their 
(bourgeois) functions to be set up in their subversive banality, in a reminder of their lost 
essence and of an order of authenticity evoked by way of the absurd. In Francis Ponge, the 
apprehension of the naked, concrete object is still the act of a - poetic - consciousness or 
source of perception. In short, whether poetic or critical, the whole of art, 'without which 
things would merely be what they are', is fuelled (before pop) by transcendence. 

12 Cf. the Conclusion, section 'The Consumption of Consumption'. 

13 Mario Amaya, Pop as Art: A Survey of the Neiv Super Realism, Studio Vista, London, 
1965. 

14 In this sense, the truth of pop might be said to be wage labour and the advertising 
hoarding, not the contract and the art gallery. 



200 


The consumer society 


15 'Popular' art is concerned not with objects, but always primarily with human beings 
and their actions. It would not paint cooked meats or the American flag, but a-man-eating 
or a-man-saluting-the-American-flag. 

16 In fact we often read this 'terroristic' humour in it, but we do so out of critical 
nostalgia on our part. 

17 Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, Sphere, London, 
1967, p. 27. 

18 It is easy to see how one can, in this sense, 'consume' language [du langage]. As soon 
as it becomes loaded with in-group connotations, and, instead of being a vehicle for 
meaning, turns into a group lexicon, a class or caste heritage (the style of the 'smart set', 
intellectual jargon; the political jargon of a party or grouping); as soon as it ceases to be a 
means of exchange and becomes a material of exchange for the internal usage of a group or 
class - its real function, under cover of conveying a message, being one of collusion and 
recognition; and as soon as, rather than putting meaning into circulation, it begins itself to 
circulate as password, as shibboleth, in a process of group tautology (the group speaking 
itself), then language is an object of consumption, a fetish. 

It is no longer being used as a language [langue], as a system of distinctive denotative 
signs, but consumed as a system of connotation, as a distinctive code. 

We find the same process in 'medical consumption'. There has been an extraordinary 
inflation of the demand for health care, closely linked to the rise in the standard of living. 
The line between 'justifiable' demand (though on what definition of a vital minimum and 
bio-psychosomatic equilibrium might it be considered justified?) and the consumer com- 
pulsion for medical, surgical and dental treatment is becoming blurred. Medical practice 
is turning into the use of the doctor him/herself and this sumptuary, conspicuous use of 
the doctor/object, the medicine/ object, joins the second home and the car as part of the 
panoply of social standing. Here again, the medication - and, particularly where the 
wealthier classes are concerned, the doctor (Balint: 'The medication most frequently 
dispensed in general practice is the doctor himself') - cease to be the means of achieving 
health, considered as a final goal, and become themselves the focus of the ultimate 
demand. They are then consumed, on the selfsame pattern of a diverting of the objective 
practical function into a mental manipulation and a sign-based calculus of a fetishistic 
type. 

We have, properly speaking, to distinguish between two levels of this 'consumption': the 
'neurotic' demand for the giving of medication, for anxiety-reducing medical care. This 
demand is just as objective as the demand which arises from an organic ailment, but it 
leads into 'consumption' in so far as the doctor no longer has any specific value at this 
level: he is substitutable, as anxiety-reducer or care-provider, for any other process of 
partial regression: alcohol, shopping or collecting (the consumer 'collects' the doctor and 
medicines). The doctor is consumed as one-sign-among-others (just as a washing machine 
may be consumed as a mark of status and ease - see Chapter 7). 

At a deep level, then, what institutes 'medical consumption' is - beyond the neurotic 
logic of individuals - a social logic of status, which incorporates the doctor as sign (quite 
apart from any objective performance and on the same basis as any other value attribute) 
into a generalized system. We can see that it is on the abstraction (the reduction) of the 
medical function that medical consumption is established. We find this pattern of system- 
atic abduction or rerouting [ detournement ] everywhere as the very principle of 
consumption. 

19 Boorstin, The Image, p. 209. 

20 This is why all forms of resistance to the introduction of advertising on TV or 
elsewhere are merely moralizing or archaic reactions. The problem lies at the level of the 
system of signification as a whole. 

21 Boorstin, The Image, p. 213. 

22 Ibid., p. 217. 

23 Ibid., p. 219. 



Notes 


201 


Chapter 8 

1 The reference in the hymn is, however, not to the body, but to the soul (Tr.). 

2 The original cartes du tendre were, of course, actual 'maps' or charts depicting the 
course of love (Tr.). 

3 See also this exemplary text from Vogue: 

A new wind is blowing through the world of beauty, a fresher, freer, healthier, less 
hypocritical wind of pride in one's body. Not pretentiousness, which is vulgar. But the 
honest awareness that our bodies are worth accepting, caring for, loving, if they are to be 
well used. We are happy that our knees are more supple, we are delighted with the length 
of our legs, with our lighter feet . . . (for these we use a mask as we do for the face . . . we 
massage our toes with an extraordinary 'supersonic' cream, we find ourselves a good 
chiropodist . . . see how on page 72). We are all for the new body-spray perfumes, which 
give a satiny finish right down to our toes. Left, mules in South African ostrich-feathers 
with embroidery by Lamel (Christian Dior). 

Etc. 

4 In French, le phryneisme. The reference here is to the Greek courtesan Phryne, who 
'when she saw that in spite of the eloquence of her defender Hyperides she was going to be 
condemned, . . . unveiled her bosom, and by this sudden display of her charms so 
influenced her judges, that she was immediately acquitted' (L empriere's Classical Dictionary, 
Bracken, London, 1984, p. 526) (Tr.). 

5 The male equivalent of the Elle text is the advert for Le President entitled 'No pity for 
executives?' This is an admirable text, which encapsulates all the themes we have analysed 
here (narcissism, the revenge of the neglected body, functional 'recycling'), except that here 
the masculine model centres on 'physical fitness' and social success, whereas the feminine 
model focused on 'beauty' and 'seduction'. 

Forty years old. Modern civilization commands him to be young. The paunch which was 
once a symbol of social success is now synonymous with decline and the scrapheap. His 
superiors, his subordinates, his wife, his secretary, his mistress, his children and the girl 
in the microskirt he's chatting to at his table outside the cafe (with who knows what in 
mind) all judge him on the quality and style of his clothes, his choice of tie and after- 
shave, the suppleness and slenderness of his body. 

He has to keep a watchful eye on everything: the crease in his trousers, his collar, his 
puns, his feet when he dances, his diet when he eats, his stamina when he is climbing 
stairs, his back when he makes a violent effort. If, only yesterday, efficiency in his work 
was enough, today he is required to possess both physical fitness and elegance. 

The myth of the healthy American businessman, part James Bond, part Henry Ford, 
confident and sure of himself, physically and psychologically well balanced, has taken its 
place in our civilization. Finding and keeping dynamic co-workers with pep and drive is 
the major concern of every business manager. 

The forty-year-old falls in with this image. This neo-N arcissus of modern times likes to 
take care of himself and tries to enjoy himself. He savours his diet, his medication, his 
physical training, the difficulty he has stopping smoking. 

Aware that his social success depends entirely on the image others have of him, that 
physical fitness is his trump card, the man of forty is looking for his second wind and his 
second youth. 

There follows the advert for Le President. There, it is chiefly fitness that is being: fitness, the 
magic word, that 'fairy godmother's gift' (after Narcissus, the fairies!), which managing 
directors, senior executives, journalists and doctors pursue 'in an air-conditioned, cocooned 
atmosphere' and 'using 37 sets of apparatus with pedals, wheels, weights, vibrations, 
levers and steel cables' (as one can see, both athleticism and phryneism, both 'fitness' and 
'beauty', are partial to gadgetry). 

6 In the technical sense of simulations where the conditions of weightlessness are 
simulated experimentally - or of mathematical models. 

7 The truth of the body is desire. And this, being lack, cannot be shown. The most 
exhaustive exhibition of that desire merely highlights it as absence, and ultimately, merely 



202 


The consumer society 


censors it. Will we one day see photos in which erections are shown? This would still be 
done under the heading of fashion. The censors thus ultimately have nothing to fear, except 
from their own desire. 

8 Norman O. Brown, Life against Death: The Psychoanalytical Meaning of History, 
Wesleyan University Press, Middletown, CT, p. 252. 

9 On this point, see Chapter 6, section 'The Structural Models'. 

10 Sexuality is no longer a celebration [une fete]. It is an erotic festival, with all that 
implies in terms of organization. Within the framework of that festival, everything is done 
also to revive 'polymorphous, perverse' sexuality. Cf. the first world fair of pornography in 
Copenhagen [this chapter, section 'The Sex-Exchange Standard']. 

11 We find the same process in the 'consumption' of Technology. Without wishing to 
contest the enormous impact of technological progress on social progress, one can see how 
technology itself falls into the domain of consumption, dividing into a daily practice 
'liberated' by innumerable 'functional' gadgets and a transcendent myth of (capital T) 
Technology, the combination of the two making it possible to head off all the revolutionary 
potentialities of a total social practice of technology. See Utopie, no. 2-3, May 1969, 'La 
Pratique sociale et la technique'. 

12 The French verb solliciter contains an ambiguity, referring at times to a demand or 
even manipulation [the expression solliciter des textes implies forcing texts or documents to 
yield significations which they do not clearly contain (Tr.)], at times to solicitude and 
gratification. See Chapter 10, 'The Mystique of Solicitude'. 

13 The Danish parliament (Tr.). 

14 This line does not actually seem to appear in either of Rimbaud's 'Villes' poems 
(commonly known as 'Villes I' and 'Villes IT) (Tr.). 

15 This phrase occurs with slight variations of emphasis in two letters which Rimbaud 
wrote in May 1871. The first of these is to Georges Izambard, the second to Paul Demeny. 
Originals and translations of both letters are to be found in Wallace Fowlie's Rimbaud: 
Complete Works, Selected Letters, University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London, 1966, 
pp. 302-11 (Tr.). 


Chapter 9 

1 It might be thought that time is, in this respect, opposed to all other objects, whose 
'use-value' traditionally lies in being possessed, utilized, employed to advantage. But this 
is without doubt a profound error. The true use-value of objects is doubtless also to be 
consumed, to be expended 'as pure loss' - a 'symbolic' use-value which is everywhere 
scored out [ barree ] and replaced by 'utilitarian' use-value. 

2 But the goal of the operation here remains strictly individual. In the archaic festival, 
time is never expended 'for oneself': it is the time of collective prodigality. 


Chapter 10 

1 Twenty per cent of national income for France. 

2 Advertising itself, as an economic process, may be regarded as a 'free celebration', 
financed by social labour but delivered to everyone 'with nothing apparently given in 
return' and presenting itself as collective gratification (see later in this chapter). 

3 Cf. Lagneau in Le Faire-Valoir, 'Advertising is the wrapping up of an unbearable 
economic logic in the thousand seductive artifices of "exemption from payment", which 
negate it the better to allow it to operate.' G. Lagneau, Le Faire-Valoir, E.M.E., Paris, 1969. 

4 On this problem, see the articles by J. Marcus-Steiff and P. Kende in the Revue frangaise 
de sociologie, 1969, X, 3. 

5 In German, the word werben, which means to ask for someone's hand in marriage and 



Notes 


203 


hence implies loving concern [sollicitude amoureuse], also means competition, rivalry and 
advertising (commercial solicitation). 

6 Riesman et al., The Lonely Crowd, p. 41. 

7 Ibid., p. 83. 

8 To take an example, 'In fact,' writes a specialist in sales promotion, 'if, before it was 
presented to the public, Giscard d'Estaing's programme had been got into shape by an 
agency like Publicis, using the methods that were so successful in the Saint-Gobain affair, 
then French voters would probably have backed him.' And he adds: 'When you think of all 
the trouble you take to win the public's favour when you launch a new bar of soap, 
bringing all the modern resources of radio, TV and cinema into play, you are amazed by the 
antiquated methods the government employ when they want to "sell'' an economic and 
financial programme running into billions of francs to the mass of the French people.' 

9 Riesman et al.. The Lonely Crowd, p. 224ff. 

10 Ibid., p. 225. 

Chapter 11 

1 'Objectless craving' has its counterpart in 'objectless raving'. 

2 Galbraith, The Affluent Society, p. 14. 

3 Erostratus or Eratostratus was an Ephesian who burnt down the temple of Diana 
solely with the object of achieving eternal fame. The Ephesians subsequently passed a law 
making it illegal to mention his name (Tr.). 

4 Economists and psychologists base their thinking wholly on equivalence and ration- 
ality: they postulate that, in all processes, the subject is always positively orientated, in a 
state of need, towards the object. If the need is satisfied, that is all there is to it. They forget 
that there is no 'satisfied need'; a completed process, where there is only positivity, is 
something which is never found: there is only desire and desire is ambivalent. 

5 Hence the very logical (American) idea of a motel for the suicidal where, for a 
reasonable price, a 'suicide service', provided like any other social service (though not 
covered by social security!), ensures that you enjoy optimum conditions for death and 
undertakes to effect your suicide effortlessly, with a smile. 

6 The original French text here is 'le malaise de la civilisation', the title of the standard 
French translation of Freud's Das Unbehagen in der Kultur (English: Civilization and its 
Discontents) (Tr.). 

7 J.S. Mill, On Liberty, ed. H.B. Acton, Dent/Dutton, London/New York, 1972, p. 124 
(my italics, JB). 


Conclusion 

1 There have been at least three versions of this film. From what he says, Baudrillard is 
clearly not referring to the first of these (Stellan Rye, 1913) and it seems most likely that he 
is familiar with the 1926 film by the Dutch-born writer-director Henrik Galeen (who was 
also involved in the earlier production). A further German version was made in 1936 by the 
Chicago-born director Arthur Robison (Tr.). 

2 Like all myths, this one also seeks to ground itself in an original event. In this case, it 
is the so-called 'Revolution of Affluence', a historical revolution of Well-Being, the last 
revolution of Western man after the Renaissance, the Industrial Revolution and the Political 
Revolutions. Consumption thereby presents itself as the opening of a new era - the final era 
of achieved Utopia and the end of history. 

3 Boorstin, The Image, p. 240. 

4 Ibid., p. 83. 

5 Ibid., p. 259. 




Index 


accounting of growth, 41-2 
advertising, 15, 46, 64, 88, 194; erotic, 146; 
and ideology of gift, 164-6; as mass 
medium, 123, 125; as messages, 121, 122; 
needs and, 71, 72; as pseudo-event, 
126-8; and solicitation, 169-70; symbols, 
145-9 

affluence, 31, 39, 40, 82; growth and, 51-2, 
53; as myth, 51, 193, 194, 195; in 
primitive societies, 11, 66-7; and 
violence, 175-8; waste and, 44, 45 
affluent society, 2, 53, 66, 192 
Alexandre, M., 81 
alienation, 73, 154, 188-90 
ambience, 28, 30, 108-9, 171-2 
ambivalence, 177, 182, 184, 198n; body 
and, 141 

Americanism, 116 
anomie, 5, 174-85 
anxiety, 177 
approval, 171-2 

art, 15-16, 105-6; multiplication of, 106-9; 

and pop art, 115-16, 116-17 
artificiality, 72, 73, 74, 173 
athleticism, 132, 136 
authentic objects, 73, 111 

Bardot, B., 130 
beauty, 132-3, 134, 135 
body, 13-14, 129-50; liberation of, 14, 135, 
141, 142 

books, 123, 125; and literary prizes, 102 
Boorstin, D.J., 125, 127, 194-5 
Bourgeois-Pichat, J., 40 
brand name, 27, 116, 148 
Brown, N.O., 136 

Cage, John, 117 
capitalism, 53, 71, 83 
cargo myth, 32-3 
cars, 47 

catastrophe, 33-6 
censorship, 145, 148, 150 
choice, 70, 96-7 

class, 8, 58-9, 62, 63, 91; culture and, 107, 
111; health and, 140 


Club Mediterranee, 151 

code, 7-8, 17-18, 59, 60, 61, 79-80, 125, 126; 

of signs, 94 
collections, 26 

communication, 103, 166, 169; mass, 10, 
33-4, 35, 103; personalized, 161 
compatibility, 170-1 
competition, 11, 65, 97, 182 
conformity, 70-1, 92-3 
consensus, 166, 168 
conspicuous consumption, 6, 54, 90 
constraints, 7, 17, 61, 82-3, 84, 176 
consumation, 43, 46 
contradiction, 94 
counter-discourse, 17, 195-6 
credit, 2, 17, 29, 81 

culture, 15-16, 97-8, 104, 108, 173; class 
and, 107, 111; dissemination, 106-7; 
production, 101-2; recycling, 100-2, 109 
curiosity, 34, 80, 108, 114; pop art and, 120 

demand, 110; control of, 71-2 
democracy of social standing, 50 
depression, 182, 185 
destruction/destructiveness, 43, 47, 177 
Devil, pact with, 187-93 
Dichter, E., 75-6 

differences: pop art and, 119-20; positive 
and negative, 61-2; production, 88-90 
differentiation, 7, 53, 92-4, 156; growth 
society and, 60-6, 74; see also 
personalization 
display, 158 
distinction, 92-4, 111 
distortion, 52, 57 
drugstores, 17, 27-30 
Durkheim, £., 4, 5, 166 
duty, 4, 80, 156 

dysfunction, 40-1, 42, 43, 51-2, 65 

economic principle, 43-4, 73 
education, 37-8 
egoism, 84 
Eisenhower, D., 82-3 
E lie, 130-1 



206 


Index 


emancipation, 137-8 
enjoyment, 78; as obligation, 80 
environmental nuisance, 39-41 
equality of consumption, 49-55, 59 
equilibrium, 50, 53, 66 
eroticism, 133-4, 135; in advertising, 146-9 
everydayness, 34-5, 118 
examination, 104 

exchange, 78, 125-6, 152, 153-4, 160; see 
also symbolic exchange 
exchange-value, 26, 108, 132, 149-50 
expenditure, 58; collective, 37-9, 40; 
sumptuary, 46, 53, 194; as waste, 44, 45 

fantasies, in advertising, 146-9 

fashion, 100, 133, 134, 141 

fasting, 142 

fatality, 36 

fatigue, 181-5 

Faye, A., 112-13 

femininity, 96-8, 136-8 

fitness, 138-40 

Foucault, M., 21n 

fragility, 174 

free offers, 164-5 

free time, 151, 153, 154, 155, 157, 158 
freedom, 61, 72-3, 158 
functionalism, 5, 135; body and, 132-4 

gadgetry, 12, 111-14 
Galbraith, J.K., 2, 51-2, 54, 55, 83; on 
needs, 70, 71-5 

genealogy of consumption, 75 
gift, 26, 67; ideology, 164-6, 168 
grand narrative, 20-1 

growth, 40, 53-4, 55, 73-4; affluence and, 2, 
51-2, 53; and differentiation, 60-6 
guilt, 35, 176 

habitat, 57 

happiness, 29, 31, 42, 49 
health, 38, 138-40 
Held, J.-F., 146 

heroes of consumption, 45-6, 195 
hippies, 179, 180-1 
holidays, 154, 156 

human relations, 11, 12, 15, 67, 160-2; 
functionalized, 163-4; production, 170-1, 
172 

hunter-gatherers, 10-11, 31, 66-7 
hygiene, 141-2 

ideology, 4, 59, 82, 123; altruistic, 83-4; of 
body, 135-6; in pop art, 116, 117, 118, 

119; of well-being, 50-1 


images, 123-4, 188, 189 
individual, 5, 49, 65, 83-5, 95; freedom of, 
72-3; group and, 70-1, 92-3; and 
sociometric compatibility, 170-1 
industrial system, 55-7, 72 
inequality, 37-8, 53-4, 57, 59 
insecurity, 40 

Johns, Jasper, 117 

kitsch, 12, 109-11 

knowledge, 57, 108; recycling, 100-2 
Kwakiutl, 43, 181 

language, 6, 79-80, 93, 200n 

leisure, 6, 10, 151-8 

liberation of body, 14, 135, 141, 142 

Lisle, E., 37, 38, 40 

lowest common culture, 103-5 

lowest common multiples, 105-9 

ludic, 112, 113-14, 192 

McLuhan, M., 123 
magical thinking, 31-2, 33 
Mailer, N., 153 
Mandeville, B., 42 
market behaviour, control, 71-2 
Marx, Karl/Marxian theory, 3-4, 16, 23n 
masculinity, 96-7, 98 
mass culture, 103-5 
mass media, 12, 35, 99-128 
means of consumption, 16-17, 19, 23n, 
27-30 

medicine, 139, 140 
Melanesia, 31-3 
membership, 107-8 

messages, 34, 121-2; media and, 122-4 
metaconsumption, 90-2 
Michel, ]., 109 
miracles, 31, 32, 34 

mobility: of labour, 40; social, 63, 64, 108, 
110, 171 

modern society, 10-12 
monopoly production, 89 
Multiple, 106-9 

myth, 17, 42, 51, 69, 82, 127, 138; of 
consumption, 193-6; of time, 151, 154 

narcissism, 95, 97, 131, 139 
nature: pop art and, 117; recycling, 100-1 
needs, 50, 62, 63-4, 65, 69-70, 76-8; 
conditioning, 71-6; and production, 
64-5, 74-6, 83; system, 74-5 
newness, 113 

news item, 33-4, 99, 121-2 



Index 


207 


Nietzsche, F., 44 
non-violence, 179-81 

objects, 25-6, 41-2, 47, 115; art and, 115-17; 
bodies and, 134-5; cultural, 91-2, 111; 
gadgets and, 112; needs and, 74, 76-8; 
profusion, 26-7; status and, 60 
obsolescence, 40, 41, 46, 100 
Oldenburg, Claes, 117 

package, 26, 28, 107, 110, 129, 130 

Parly, 2, 28, 29 

passion, 114 

passivity, 35, 36, 74, 183 

penury, 8, 66, 67 

Perroux, F., 159, 160 

personalization, 7-8, 9, 87-98, 109, 139, 170 

Peter Schlemihl (Chamisso), 188-9, 190 

phryneism, 132, 136 

pinball machines, 114 

play, 10-11, 105, 114 

Playtime (Tati), 164 

pleasure principle, 134-5 

political control, 168-9 

pollution, 39 

pop art, 16, 114-21, 200n 

popularization, 62-3 

pornography, 143 

postmodernism, 9-14, 22n 

potlatch, 44, 46 

poverty, 7, 11, 42, 51, 67; industrial system 
and, 2, 8, 55-7 
power, 38, 54, 57, 59, 67, 72 
preservation, instinct, 44 
prestige, 6, 64, 93, 139, 140 
primitive society, 10-12, 21, 31, 66-7, 129, 
152 

privilege, 8, 38, 54-5, 66 
production, 5, 46, 52, 63, 71-2; 
consumption and, 3-4, 7, 19-20, 78, 

81-3; needs and, 64-5, 74-6, 83 
profusion, 26-7 
proving oneself, 171-2 
pseudo-events, 125-8 
pseudo-objects, 12, 110, 121-3 
psychoanalysis, 147 
public opinion, 86, 195 
public relations, 165 
publications, weekly instalment, 107-8 
Pueblo, 181 

puritan ethic, 75-6, 132, 141-2 
quiz machine, 103, 104-5 


reality, 12, 33-4, 126, 128, 149-50; denial, 
99-100; mass media and, 122; in pop art, 
116, 117, 118 
recognition, 119 
recycling of culture, 100-2, 109 
redistribution, 37-9, 52, 55, 160 
referendum, 168 

rejection of affluence, 175, 176, 179-80, 181 
relativity, 61, 171, 173 
repression, 137, 141, 142, 145, 190 
resurrection, 99-100 

revolution, 4, 7, 8, 13, 82, 138; code and, 

94; of well-being, 50-5 
Riesman, D., 70, 88, 93, 170, 171, 172, 181 
Rimbaud, A., 145 
Rosenquist, James, 117 

sacralization, 41; of art, 119; of body, 132, 
136, 139^10 
Sahlins, M., 11, 66 

Saint-Gobain, takeover bid for, 168-9 
salvation, 8, 60, 156, 158; body as object of, 
14, 129, 135-6, 140 
satisfaction, 61, 69, 71, 73 
scarcity, 43, 57, 66 
Science et vie, 107 
segmentation, 122, 123, 124 
segregation, 57-8, 63 
self-fulfilling prophecy, 127-8, 194 
self-indulgence, 95, 97 
service/s, 59, 137, 161, 163-4 
sexed doll, 149-50 
sexuality, 14, 133, 137, 143-5, 149-50 
Shakespeare, W., 44 
shop-window, 27, 166, 192 
sick society, 167 
sign-value, 6, 20, 77 
signification, 7, 27, 33, 60, 88, 115, 125 
signs, 78, 79, 122, 124, 192; in advertising, 
147-8; body and, 133-4, 138; 
consumption as system of, 7, 14, 15, 17, 
33, 34; and difference, 90-1, 94; and pop 
art, 115-16, 120 

simulation, 11-13, 111, 126, 163 
sincerity, 172-3 
ski resorts, 28 
slimness, 140-3 
smile, 120-1, 161-2 

social discrimination, 54, 57-8, 59, 156 

social integration, 84, 104, 168, 170, 194 

social labour, 75, 84, 85, 190 

social logic, 9, 11, 19, 43, 49-68, 77, 93 

social rights, 58 

social transfers, 37-9, 159-60 

sociality, 162, 170-1 



208 


Index 


socialization, 4, 47, 81, 82 
sociology, 5, 8-9, 20 
solicitude, 12-13, 15, 141, 159-73 
soul, 135, 136, 191 
space, 57-8, 120 
standard package, 70, 104 
status, 60, 64, 138-9; body as signifier of, 
131-2; culture and, 108, 110 
structuralism, 6-8, 16, 79-80 
Student of Prague, 187-8, 189, 190 
Sullerot, E., 95 
Swift, 163 

symbolic exchange, 10, 12, 21, 67, 93; 

sexuality as, 149-50 
symbolic meanings, 114-15 

Tati, ]., 164 
taxation, 38 

technology, 54, 112, 113, 191, 202n 
television, 122, 123-4 
therapeutic society, 167, 177 
time, 10, 25, 120, 151-4, 155, 157, 158 
tirlipot, 102-3 
tolerance, 173 

training/retraining, 81, 100, 175 
transcendence, end of, 191, 192 


unconscious, 93, 146-8 
underconsumption, 6, 54-5, 90-1 
use-value, 43, 50, 150, 152, 154, 202n 
uselessness, 12, 112 
utility, 43, 69, 112 

Valery, P., 44 

value/s, 70, 78, 172; democratic, 163-4; 
leisure and, 157-8; symbolic, 44-5; 
vicarious, 97 
Veblen, T., 6, 157 
verres de Vamitie, 162 
violence, 35-6, 143, 175-9 


Warhol, Andy, 118, 119 

waste, 5, 10, 42-7, 197n; of time, 154, 155 

wealth, 11, 54, 67 

well-being, 49-55 

Whitehead, A.N., 69 

women, 95-6, 97-8; beauty and, 132-3; 

female body, 136-8 
work, 157, 185 


young people, 137-8 
